ï»¿The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Iliad, by Homer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Iliad

Author: Homer

Translator: Alexander Pope

Release Date: November 17, 2002 [eBook #6130]
[Most recently updated: February 5, 2022]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Anne Soulard, Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks, and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD ***




The
Iliad of Homer

Translated by
Alexander Pope,

With Notes and Introduction
by the
Rev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A.

and
Flaxmanâs Designs.

1899


Contents

 INTRODUCTION.
 POPEâS PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER

 THE ILIAD
 BOOK I.
 BOOK II.
 BOOK III.
 BOOK IV.
 BOOK V.
 BOOK VI.
 BOOK VII.
 BOOK VIII.
 BOOK IX.
 BOOK X.
 BOOK XI.
 BOOK XII.
 BOOK XIII.
 BOOK XIV.
 BOOK XV.
 BOOK XVI.
 BOOK XVII.
 BOOK XVIII.
 BOOK XIX.
 BOOK XX.
 BOOK XXI.
 BOOK XXII.
 BOOK XXIII.
 BOOK XXIV.

 CONCLUDING NOTE.




Illustrations

 HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE
 MARS
 MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES
 THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES
 THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER
 THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES
 VULCAN
 JUPITER
 THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER
 JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON
 NEPTUNE
 VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS
 VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS
 VENUS
 Map, titled âGRÃCIÃ ANTIQUÃâ
 THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS
 Map of the Plain of Troy
 VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS
 OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE
 DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS
 JUNO
 HECTOR CHIDING PARIS
 THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE
 BOWS AND BOW CASE
 IRIS
 HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS
 GREEK AMPHORAâWINE VESSELS
 JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS
 THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNOâS CAR
 THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES
 PLUTO
 THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES
 GREEK GALLEY
 PROSERPINE
 ACHILLES
 DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS
 THE DESCENT OF DISCORD
 HERCULES
 POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR
 GREEK ALTAR
 NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA
 GREEK EARRINGS
 SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER
 GREEK SHIELD
 BACCHUS
 AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS
 CASTOR AND POLLUX
 Buckles
 DIANA
 SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO LYCIA
 ÃSCULAPIUS
 FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS
 VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM
 THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA
 JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET
 TRIPOD
 THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN
 VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS
 THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES
 HERCULES
 THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE
 CENTAUR
 ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS
 THE BATH
 ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL
 THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS
 CERES
 HECTORâS BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES
 THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS
 IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR
 FUNERAL OF HECTOR




INTRODUCTION.


Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the
most part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very
gradual character of our education, we must continually forget, and
emancipate ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set
aside old notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be
daily unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and
anxiety to acquire.

And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu
of their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues
of sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as
powerful a touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy
scepticism of a temperate class of antagonists, as the dreams of
conservatism, or the impostures of pluralist sinecures in the Church.
History and tradition, whether of ancient or comparatively recent
times, are subjected to very different handling from that which the
indulgence or credulity of former ages could allow. Mere statements are
jealously watched, and the motives of the writer form as important an
ingredient in the analysis of his history, as the facts he records.
Probability is a powerful and troublesome test; and it is by this
troublesome standard that a large portion of historical evidence is
sifted. Consistency is no less pertinacious and exacting in its
demands. In brief, to write a history, we must know more than mere
facts. Human nature, viewed under an induction of extended experience,
is the best help to the criticism of human history. Historical
characters can only be estimated by the standard which human
experience, whether actual or traditionary, has furnished. To form
correct views of individuals we must regard them as forming parts of a
great wholeâwe must measure them by their relation to the mass of
beings by whom they are surrounded, and, in contemplating the incidents
in their lives or condition which tradition has handed down to us, we
must rather consider the general bearing of the whole narrative, than
the respective probability of its details.

It is unfortunate for us, that, of some of the greatest men, we know
least, and talk most. Homer, Socrates, and Shakespere[1] have, perhaps,
contributed more to the intellectual enlightenment of mankind than any
other three writers who could be named, and yet the history of all
three has given rise to a boundless ocean of discussion, which has left
us little save the option of choosing which theory or theories we will
follow. The personality of Shakespere is, perhaps, the only thing in
which critics will allow us to believe without controversy; but upon
everything else, even down to the authorship of plays, there is more or
less of doubt and uncertainty. Of Socrates we know as little as the
contradictions of Plato and Xenophon will allow us to know. He was one
of the _dramatis personÃ¦_ in two dramas as unlike in principles as in
style. He appears as the enunciator of opinions as different in their
tone as those of the writers who have handed them down. When we have
read Plato _or_ Xenophon, we think we know something of Socrates; when
we have fairly read and examined both, we feel convinced that we are
something worse than ignorant.

It has been an easy, and a popular expedient, of late years, to deny
the personal or real existence of men and things whose life and
condition were too much for our belief. This systemâwhich has often
comforted the religious sceptic, and substituted the consolations of
Strauss for those of the New Testamentâhas been of incalculable value
to the historical theorists of the last and present centuries. To
question the existence of Alexander the Great, would be a more
excusable act, than to believe in that of Romulus. To deny a fact
related in Herodotus, because it is inconsistent with a theory
developed from an Assyrian inscription which no two scholars read in
the same way, is more pardonable, than to believe in the good-natured
old king whom the elegant pen of Florian has idealizedâ_Numa
Pompilius._

Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer,
and the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free
permission to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard all
written tradition, concerning the author or authors of the Iliad and
Odyssey. What few authorities exist on the subject, are summarily
dismissed, although the arguments appear to run in a circle. âThis
cannot be true, because it is not true; and, that is not true, because
it cannot be true.â Such seems to be the style, in which testimony upon
testimony, statement upon statement, is consigned to denial and
oblivion.

It is, however, unfortunate that the professed biographies of Homer are
partly forgeries, partly freaks of ingenuity and imagination, in which
truth is the requisite most wanting. Before taking a brief review of
the Homeric theory in its present conditions, some notice must be taken
of the treatise on the Life of Homer which has been attributed to
Herodotus.

According to this document, the city of CumÃ¦ in Ãolia, was, at an
early period, the seat of frequent immigrations from various parts of
Greece. Among the immigrants was Menapolus, the son of Ithagenes.
Although poor, he married, and the result of the union was a girl named
CritheÃ¯s. The girl was left an orphan at an early age, under the
guardianship of Cleanax, of Argos. It is to the indiscretion of this
maiden that we âare indebted for so much happiness.â Homer was the
first fruit of her juvenile frailty, and received the name of
Melesigenes, from having been born near the river Meles, in BÅotia,
whither CritheÃ¯s had been transported in order to save her reputation.

âAt this time,â continues our narrative, âthere lived at Smyrna a man
named Phemius, a teacher of literature and music, who, not being
married, engaged CritheÃ¯s to manage his household, and spin the flax he
received as the price of his scholastic labours. So satisfactory was
her performance of this task, and so modest her conduct, that he made
proposals of marriage, declaring himself, as a further inducement,
willing to adopt her son, who, he asserted, would become a clever man,
if he were carefully brought up.â

They were married; careful cultivation ripened the talents which nature
had bestowed, and Melesigenes soon surpassed his schoolfellows in every
attainment, and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon
followed. Melesigenes carried on his adopted fatherâs school with great
success, exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna,
but also of the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially
in the exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these
visitors, one Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who
evinced a knowledge and intelligence rarely found in those times,
persuaded Melesigenes to close his school, and accompany him on his
travels. He promised not only to pay his expenses, but to furnish him
with a further stipend, urging, that, âWhile he was yet young, it was
fitting that he should see with his own eyes the countries and cities
which might hereafter be the subjects of his discourses.â Melesigenes
consented, and set out with his patron, âexamining all the curiosities
of the countries they visited, and informing himself of everything by
interrogating those whom he met.â We may also suppose, that he wrote
memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of preservation.[2] Having set
sail from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached Ithaca. Here Melesigenes,
who had already suffered in his eyes, became much worse, and Mentes,
who was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to the medical
superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of Alcinor.
Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly became
acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards formed
the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that it
was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophomans make their
city the seat of that misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where he
applied himself to the study of poetry.[3]

But poverty soon drove him to CumÃ¦. Having passed over the HermÃ¦an
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of CumÃ¦.
Here his misfortunes and poetical talent gained him the friendship of
one Tychias, an armourer. âAnd up to my time,â continued the author,
âthe inhabitants showed the place where he used to sit when giving a
recitation of his verses, and they greatly honoured the spot. Here also
a poplar grew, which they said had sprung up ever since Melesigenes
arrivedâ.[4]

But poverty still drove him on, and he went by way of Larissa, as being
the most convenient road. Here, the Cumans say, he composed an epitaph
on Gordius, king of Phrygia, which has however, and with greater
probability, been attributed to Cleobulus of Lindus.[5]

Arrived at CumÃ¦, he frequented the _converzationes_[6] of the old men,
and delighted all by the charms of his poetry. Encouraged by this
favourable reception, he declared that, if they would allow him a
public maintenance, he would render their city most gloriously
renowned. They avowed their willingness to support him in the measure
he proposed, and procured him an audience in the council. Having made
the speech, with the purport of which our author has forgotten to
acquaint us, he retired, and left them to debate respecting the answer
to be given to his proposal.

The greater part of the assembly seemed favourable to the poetâs
demand, but one man observed that âif they were to feed _Homers_, they
would be encumbered with a multitude of useless people.â âFrom this
circumstance,â says the writer, âMelesigenes acquired the name of
Homer, for the Cumans call blind men _Homers_.â[7] With a love of
economy, which shows how similar the world has always been in its
treatment of literary men, the pension was denied, and the poet vented
his disappointment in a wish that CumÃ¦a might never produce a poet
capable of giving it renown and glory.

At PhocÅa, Homer was destined to experience another literary distress.
One Thestorides, who aimed at the reputation of poetical genius, kept
Homer in his own house, and allowed him a pittance, on condition of the
verses of the poet passing in his name. Having collected sufficient
poetry to be profitable, Thestorides, like some would-be-literary
publishers, neglected the man whose brains he had sucked, and left him.
At his departure, Homer is said to have observed: âO Thestorides, of
the many things hidden from the knowledge of man, nothing is more
unintelligible than the human heart.â[8]

Homer continued his career of difficulty and distress, until some Chian
merchants, struck by the similarity of the verses they heard him
recite, acquainted him with the fact that Thestorides was pursuing a
profitable livelihood by the recital of the very same poems. This at
once determined him to set out for Chios. No vessel happened then to be
setting sail thither, but he found one ready to start for ErythrÃ¦, a
town of Ionia, which faces that island, and he prevailed upon the
seamen to allow him to accompany them. Having embarked, he invoked a
favourable wind, and prayed that he might be able to expose the
imposture of Thestorides, who, by his breach of hospitality, had drawn
down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.

At ErythrÃ¦, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in
PhocÅa, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty,
reached the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure,
which we will continue in the words of our author. âHaving set out from
Pithys, Homer went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were
pasturing. The dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus
(for that was the name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up
quickly, called off his dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For some
time he stood wondering how a blind man should have reached such a
place alone, and what could be his design in coming. He then went up to
him, and inquired who he was, and how he had come to desolate places
and untrodden spots, and of what he stood in need. Homer, by recounting
to him the whole history of his misfortunes, moved him with compassion;
and he took him, and led him to his cot, and having lit a fire, bade
him sup.[9]

âThe dogs, instead of eating, kept barking at the stranger, according
to their usual habit. Whereupon Homer addressed Glaucus thus: O
Glaucus, my friend, prythee attend to my behest. First give the dogs
their supper at the doors of the hut: for so it is better, since,
whilst they watch, nor thief nor wild beast will approach the fold.

Glaucus was pleased with the advice, and marvelled at its author.
Having finished supper, they banqueted[10] afresh on conversation,
Homer narrating his wanderings, and telling of the cities he had
visited.

At length they retired to rest; but on the following morning, Glaucus
resolved to go to his master, and acquaint him with his meeting with
Homer. Having left the goats in charge of a fellow-servant, he left
Homer at home, promising to return quickly. Having arrived at Bolissus,
a place near the farm, and finding his mate, he told him the whole
story respecting Homer and his journey. He paid little attention to
what he said, and blamed Glaucus for his stupidity in taking in and
feeding maimed and enfeebled persons. However, he bade him bring the
stranger to him.

Glaucus told Homer what had taken place, and bade him follow him,
assuring him that good fortune would be the result. Conversation soon
showed that the stranger was a man of much cleverness and general
knowledge, and the Chian persuaded him to remain, and to undertake the
charge of his children.[11]

Besides the satisfaction of driving the impostor Thestorides from the
island, Homer enjoyed considerable success as a teacher. In the town of
Chios he established a school where he taught the precepts of poetry.
âTo this day,â says Chandler,[12] âthe most curious remaining is that
which has been named, without reason, the School of Homer. It is on the
coast, at some distance from the city, northward, and appears to have
been an open temple of Cybele, formed on the top of a rock. The shape
is oval, and in the centre is the image of the goddess, the head and an
arm wanting. She is represented, as usual, sitting. The chair has a
lion carved on each side, and on the back. The area is bounded by a low
rim, or seat, and about five yards over. The whole is hewn out of the
mountain, is rude, indistinct, and probably of the most remote
antiquity.â

So successful was this school, that Homer realised a considerable
fortune. He married, and had two daughters, one of whom died single,
the other married a Chian.

The following passage betrays the same tendency to connect the
personages of the poems with the history of the poet, which has already
been mentioned:â

âIn his poetical compositions Homer displays great gratitude towards
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his
poem as the companion of Ulysses,[13] in return for the care taken of
him when afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to
Phemius, who had given him both sustenance and instruction.â

His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to
visit Greece, whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is
said, made some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity
of the Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention,[14] he
sent out for Samos. Here being recognized by a Samian, who had met with
him in Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in
celebrating the Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gave
great satisfaction, and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon
festivals, he earned a subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich,
with whose children he was very popular.

In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios,
now Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his
death arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma
proposed by some fishermenâs children.[15]

Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we
possess, and so broad are the evidences of its historical
worthlessness, that it is scarcely necessary to point them out in
detail. Let us now consider some of the opinions to which a
persevering, patient, and learnedâbut by no means consistentâseries of
investigations has led. In doing so, I profess to bring forward
statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or probability.

âHomer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who
have done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The
majestic stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the
Nile, through many lands and nations; and, like the sources of the
Nile, its fountains will ever remain concealed.â

Such are the words in which one of the most judicious German critics
has eloquently described the uncertainty in which the whole of the
Homeric question is involved. With no less truth and feeling he
proceeds:â

âIt seems here of chief importance to expect no more than the nature of
things makes possible. If the period of tradition in history is the
region of twilight, we should not expect in it perfect light. The
creations of genius always seem like miracles, because they are, for
the most part, created far out of the reach of observation. If we were
in possession of all the historical testimonies, we never could wholly
explain the origin of the Iliad and the Odyssey; for their origin, in
all essential points, must have remained the secret of the poet.â[16]

From this criticism, which shows as much insight into the depths of
human nature as into the minute wire-drawings of scholastic
investigation, let us pass on to the main question at issue. Was Homer
an individual?[17] or were the Iliad and Odyssey the result of an
ingenious arrangement of fragments by earlier poets?

Well has Landor remarked: âSome tell us there were twenty Homers; some
deny that there was ever one. It were idle and foolish to shake the
contents of a vase, in order to let them settle at last. We are
perpetually labouring to destroy our delights, our composure, our
devotion to superior power. Of all the animals on earth we least know
what is good for us. My opinion is, that what is best for us is our
admiration of good. No man living venerates Homer more than I do.â[18]

But, greatly as we admire the generous enthusiasm which rests contented
with the poetry on which its best impulses had been nurtured and
fostered, without seeking to destroy the vividness of first impressions
by minute analysisâour editorial office compels us to give some
attention to the doubts and difficulties with which the Homeric
question is beset, and to entreat our reader, for a brief period, to
prefer his judgment to his imagination, and to condescend to dry
details.

Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of
this unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must
express my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following
remarks:â

âWe cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the
better, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its
original composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that
its primitive integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to
assert, that the minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not
the best qualification for the profound feeling, the comprehensive
conception of an harmonious whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be
no judge of the symmetry of the human frame: and we would take the
opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general beauty
of a form, rather than that of Mr. Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

âThere is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines
of Pope.â

ââThe critic eyeâthat microscope of wit
Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit,
How parts relate to parts, or they to whole,
The bodyâs harmony, the beaming soul,
Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
When manâs whole frame is obvious to a flea.ââ[19]


Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning
the unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and
cautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,[20]
the authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern
critics. Longinus, in an oft quoted passage, merely expressed an
opinion touching the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the
Iliad,[21] and, among a mass of ancient authors, whose very names[22]
it would be tedious to detail, no suspicion of the personal
non-existence of Homer ever arose. So far, the voice of antiquity seems
to be in favour of our early ideas on the subject; let us now see what
are the discoveries to which more modern investigations lay claim.

At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on
the subject, and we find Bentley remarking that âHomer wrote a sequel
of songs and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and
good cheer, at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs
were not collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about
Peisistratusâ time, about five hundred years after.â[23]

Two French writersâHedelin and Perraultâavowed a similar scepticism on
the subject; but it is in the âScienza Nuovaâ of Battista Vico, that we
first meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf
with so much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian
theory that we have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold
hypothesis, which we will detail in the words of Grote:â[24]

âHalf a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of
the Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by
no means the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously
announced by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent
portions of the Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into
any compact body and unchangeable order, until the days of
Peisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ. As a step towards
that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either poem
could be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which their
composition is referred; and that without writing, neither the perfect
symmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceived
by any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance to
posterity. The absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must be
indispensably supposed for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks,
was thus one of the points in Wolfâs case against the primitive
integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch, and other leading
opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other seems to
have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been considered
incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of the
Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from the
beginning.

âTo me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that
view of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to
controvert it, we were driven to the necessity of admitting long
written poems, in the ninth century before the Christian Ã¦ra. Few
things, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight,
opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less than
Wolf himself. The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventh
century before the Christian Ã¦ra, are exceedingly trifling. We have no
remaining inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the early
inscriptions are rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assure
ourselves whether Archilochus, SimonidÃªs of Amorgus, Kallinus,
TyrtÃ¦us, Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and lyric poets,
committed their compositions to writing, or at what time the practice
of doing so became familiar. The first positive ground which authorizes
us to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the famous
ordinance of SolÃ´n, with regard to the rhapsodies at the PanathenÃ¦a:
but for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we are
unable to say.

âThose who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the
existing habits of society with regard to poetryâfor they admit
generally that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and
heard,âbut upon the supposed necessity that there must have been
manuscripts to ensure the preservation of the poemsâthe unassisted
memory of reciters being neither sufficient nor trustworthy. But here
we only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for the
existence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory,[25] is
far less astonishing than that of long manuscripts, in an age
essentially non-reading and non-writing, and when even suitable
instruments and materials for the process are not obvious. Moreover,
there is a strong positive reason for believing that the bard was under
no necessity of refreshing his memory by consulting a manuscript; for
if such had been the fact, blindness would have been a disqualification
for the profession, which we know that it was not, as well from the
example of Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the blind bard of
Chios, in the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as well as
the general tenor of Grecian legend, identifies with Homer himself. The
author of that hymn, be he who he may, could never have described a
blind man as attaining the utmost perfection in his art, if he had been
conscious that the memory of the bard was only maintained by constant
reference to the manuscript in his chest.â

The loss of the digamma, that _crux_ of critics, that quicksand upon
which even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove beyond
a doubt, that the pronunciation of the Greek language had undergone a
considerable change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the
Homeric poems could have suffered by this change, had written copies
been preserved. If Chaucerâs poetry, for instance, had not been
written, it could only have come down to us in a softened form, more
like the effeminate version of Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble
original.

âAt what period,â continues Grote, âthese poems, or indeed any other
Greek poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture,
though there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of
SolÃ´n. If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any
more determinate period, the question at once suggests itself, What
were the purposes which, in that state of society, a manuscript at its
first commencement must have been intended to answer? For whom was a
written Iliad necessary? Not for the rhapsodes; for with them it was
not only planted in the memory, but also interwoven with the feelings,
and conceived in conjunction with all those flexions and intonations of
voice, pauses, and other oral artifices which were required for
emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could never
reproduce. Not for the general publicâthey were accustomed to receive
it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a solemn
and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad would
be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class of
readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed.
If we could discover at what time such a class first began to be
formed, we should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic
poems were first committed to writing. Now the period which may with
the greatest probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the
formation even of the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle
of the seventh century before the Christian Ã¦ra (B.C. 660 to B.C.
630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, SimonidÃªs of
Amorgus, &c. I ground this supposition on the change then operated in
the character and tendencies of Grecian poetry and musicâthe elegiac
and the iambic measures having been introduced as rivals to the
primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions having been transferred
from the epical past to the affairs of present and real life. Such a
change was important at a time when poetry was the only known mode of
publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable, yet the
nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking at
the old epical treasures of the people as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it, may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric
rhapsodies, just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and
eulogized the ThebaÃ¯s as the production of Homer. There seems,
therefore, ground for conjecturing that (for the use of this
newly-formed and important, but very narrow class), manuscripts of the
Homeric poems and other old epics,âthe ThebaÃ¯s and the Cypria, as well
as the Iliad and the Odyssey,âbegan to be compiled towards the middle
of the seventh century (B.C. 1); and the opening of Egypt to Grecian
commerce, which took place about the same period, would furnish
increased facilities for obtaining the requisite papyrus to write upon.
A reading class, when once formed, would doubtless slowly increase, and
the number of manuscripts along with it; so that before the time of
SolÃ´n, fifty years afterwards, both readers and manuscripts, though
still comparatively few, might have attained a certain recognized
authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against the carelessness
of individual rhapsodes.â[26]

But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of
the credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following
observationsâ

âThere are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion,
throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid
compilation, at least over the theory, that the Iliad was cast into its
present stately and harmonious form by the directions of the Athenian
ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the bright period of
Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited little more than the
fame, and the faint echo, if Stesichorus, Anacreon, and SimonidÃªs were
employed in the noble task of compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much
must have been done to arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is
almost incredible, that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should
not remain. Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies
which no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the
Homeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may have
perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among the
heroes of her age, however Mr. Knight may have failed in reducing the
Homeric language to its primitive form; however, finally, the Attic
dialect may not have assumed all its more marked and distinguishing
characteristicsâstill it is difficult to suppose that the language,
particularly in the joinings and transitions, and connecting parts,
should not more clearly betray the incongruity between the more ancient
and modern forms of expression. It is not quite in character with such
a period to imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an
imperfect poem in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott
has done in his continuation of Sir Tristram.

âIf, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of Athenian
compilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the total
absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy of
observation. In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times,
the Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of their
ancestors. But, amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greece
embodied in the Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and
insignificant part. Even the few passages which relate to their
ancestors, Mr. Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible,
indeed, that in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic
fact, that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
the rival and half-kindred empire of the LaomedontiadÃ¦, the chieftain
of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his forces, may have
been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian sovereign; the
preeminent value of the ancient poetry on the Trojan war may thus have
forced the national feeling of the Athenians to yield to their taste.
The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no doubt, of
far inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid
would have been much more likely to have emanated from an Athenian
synod of compilers of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid.
Could France have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the
hero of the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all its
direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the poetic
cycle, as to admit no rivalry,âit is still surprising, that throughout
the whole poem the callida junctura should never betray the workmanship
of an Athenian hand, and that the national spirit of a race, who have
at a later period not inaptly been compared to our self admiring
neighbours, the French, should submit with lofty self denial to the
almost total exclusion of their own ancestorsâor, at least, to the
questionable dignity of only having produced a leader tolerably skilled
in the military tactics of his age.â[27]

To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that
Wolfâs objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey
have never been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they
have failed to enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the
difficulties with which the whole subject is beset, are rather
augmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis. Nor is
Lachmannâs[28] modification of his theory any better. He divides the
first twenty-two books of the Iliad into sixteen different songs, and
treats as ridiculous the belief that their amalgamation into one
regular poem belongs to a period earlier than the age of Peisistratus.
This, as Grote observes, âexplains the gaps and contradictions in the
narrative, but it explains nothing else.â Moreover, we find no
contradictions warranting this belief, and the so-called sixteen poets
concur in getting rid of the following leading men in the first battle
after the secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the EubÅans;
Tlepolemus, of the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odius, of the
Halizonians; Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroes
again make their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure,
that âit seems strange that any number of independent poets should have
so harmoniously dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel.â
The discrepancy, by which PylÃ¦menes, who is represented as dead in the
fifth book, weeps at his sonâs funeral in the thirteenth, can only be
regarded as the result of an interpolation.

Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmannâs modifications with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success,
that the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems,
or, supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by
Peisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct. In
short, âa man may believe the Iliad to have been put together out of
pre-existing songs, without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the
period of its first compilation.â The friends or literary _employÃªs_ of
Peisistratus must have found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the
silence of the Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic
ârecension,â goes far to prove, that, among the numerous manuscripts
they examined, this was either wanting, or thought unworthy of
attention.

âMoreover,â he continues, âthe whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad
or Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age
of Peisistratusânothing which brings to our view the alterations
brought about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined
money, the habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican
governments, the close military array, the improved construction of
ships, the Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of
religious festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c.,
familiar to the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the
other literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to
notice, even without design, had they then, for the first time,
undertaken the task of piecing together many self existent epics into
one large aggregate. Everything in the two great Homeric poems, both in
substance and in language, belongs to an age two or three centuries
earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the interpolations (or those
passages which, on the best grounds, are pronounced to be such) betray
no trace of the sixth century before Christ, and may well have been
heard by Archilochus and Kallinusâin some cases even by Arktinus and
Hesiodâas genuine Homeric matter.[29] As far as the evidences on the
case, as well internal as external, enable us to judge, we seem
warranted in believing that the Iliad and Odyssey were recited
substantially as they now stand (always allowing for partial
divergences of text and interpolations) in 776 B.C., our first
trustworthy mark of Grecian time; and this ancient date, let it be
added, as it is the best-authenticated fact, so it is also the most
important attribute of the Homeric poems, considered in reference to
Grecian history; for they thus afford us an insight into the
anti-historical character of the Greeks, enabling us to trace the
subsequent forward march of the nation, and to seize instructive
contrasts between their former and their later condition.â[30]

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of
Peisistratus were wholly of an editorial character, although, I must
confess, that I can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his
labours. At the same time, so far from believing that the composition
or primary arrangement of these poems, in their present form, was the
work of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste and
elegant mind of that Athenian[31] would lead him to preserve an ancient
and traditional order of the poems, rather than to patch and
re-construct them according to a fanciful hypothesis. I will not repeat
the many discussions respecting whether the poems were written or not,
or whether the art of writing was known in the time of their reputed
author. Suffice it to say, that the more we read, the less satisfied we
are upon either subject.

I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version
of the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical
probability must be measured by that of many others relating to the
Spartan Confucius.

I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt,
made by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like
consistency. It is as follows:â

âNo doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common sailors
of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to âdiscourse in excellent
musicâ among them. Many of these, like those of the negroes in the
United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events passing
around them. But what was passing around them? The grand events of a
spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as the
mystical legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besides
which, a retentive memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, and
was cultivated accordingly in those ancient times. Ballads at first,
and down to the beginning of the war with Troy, were merely
recitations, with an intonation. Then followed a species of recitative,
probably with an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the
memory considerably.

âIt was at this period, about four hundred years after the war, that a
poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or MÅonides, but most
probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be made of great
utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position of
Hellas, and, as a collection, he published these lays, connecting them
by a tale of his own. This poem now exists, under the title of the
âOdyssea.â The author, however, did not affix his own name to the poem,
which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled from the archaic
dialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him. He
therefore called it the poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is
rather a proof of his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging
arrangement of other peopleâs ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed,
arguing for the unity of authorship, âa great poet might have re-cast
pre-existing separate songs into one comprehensive whole; but no mere
arrangers or compilers would be competent to do so.â

âWhile employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a ballad,
recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble mind seized
the hint that there presented itself, and the AchilleÃ¯s[32] grew under
his hand. Unity of design, however, caused him to publish the poem
under the same pseudonyme as his former work: and the disjointed lays
of the ancient bards were joined together, like those relating to the
Cid, into a chronicle history, named the Iliad. Melesigenes knew that
the poem was destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but,
first, the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and
corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the streets,
assemblies, and agoras. However, SolÃ´n first, and then Peisistratus,
and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the poems, and restored
the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their original integrity in a great
measure.â[33]

Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which
have developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I
must still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of
the Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations
disfigure them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here
and there have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of
the copyist, would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is to a
higher criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or
enjoy these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of
their one author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari
eum jus fasque sit_, I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of
historical evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these
great works to a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal
evidence, and that which springs from the deepest and most immediate
impulse of the soul, also speaks eloquently to the contrary.

The minutiÃ¦ of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise.
Indeed, considering the character of some of my own books, such an
attempt would be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its
importance in a philological view, I am inclined to set little store on
its Ã¦sthetic value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the
emendations made upon poets are mere alterations, some of which, had
they been suggested to the author by his MÃ¦cenas or Africanus, he
would probably have adopted. Moreover, those who are most exact in
laying down rules of verbal criticism and interpretation, are often
least competent to carry out their own precepts. Grammarians are not
poets by profession, but may be so _per accidens_. I do not at this
moment remember two emendations on Homer, calculated to substantially
improve the poetry of a passage, although a mass of remarks, from
Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history of a thousand minute
points, without which our Greek knowledge would be gloomy and jejune.

But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will
exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down an
heroic or dramatic poet to the block upon which they have previously
dissected his words and sentences, they proceed to use the axe and the
pruning knife by wholesale, and inconsistent in everything but their
wish to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut out book
after book, passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a
collection of fragments, or till those, who fancied they possessed the
works of some great man, find that they have been put off with a vile
counterfeit got up at second hand. If we compare the theories of
Knight, Wolf, Lachmann, and others, we shall feel better satisfied of
the utter uncertainty of criticism than of the apocryphal position of
Homer. One rejects what another considers the turning-point of his
theory. One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another would
explain by omitting something else.

Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon
as a literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar of no ordinary skill,
seems to revel in the imaginary discovery, that the tragedies
attributed to Seneca are by _four_ different authors.[34] Now, I will
venture to assert, that these tragedies are so uniform, not only in
their borrowed phraseologyâa phraseology with which writers like
Boethius and Saxo Grammaticus were more charmed than ourselvesâin their
freedom from real poetry, and last, but not least, in an ultra-refined
and consistent abandonment of good taste, that few writers of the
present day would question the capabilities of the same gentleman, be
he Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but a great many more
equally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin astonished the world
with the startling announcement that the Ãneid of Virgil, and the
satires of Horace, were literary deceptions. Now, without wishing to
say one word of disrespect against the industry and learningânay, the
refined acutenessâwhich scholars, like Wolf, have bestowed upon this
subject, I must express my fears, that many of our modern Homeric
theories will become matter for the surprise and entertainment, rather
than the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help thinking, that the
literary history of more recent times will account for many points of
difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to a period so
remote from that of their first creation.

I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus
were of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason
why corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in
his day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should
have given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, after
all, the main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand
too great a sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully
appeals, and which are its most fitting judges. The ingenuity which has
sought to rob us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much
violence to that inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with
love and admiration for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the author
of the Iliad a mere compiler, is to degrade the powers of human
invention; to elevate analytical judgment at the expense of the most
ennobling impulses of the soul; and to forget the ocean in the
contemplation of a polypus. There is a catholicity, so to speak, in the
very name of Homer. Our faith in the author of the Iliad may be a
mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us a better.

While, however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has nature
herself for its mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius in
believing in Homer as the ghost, who, like some patron saint, hovers
round the bed of the poet, and even bestows rare gifts from that wealth
of imagination which a host of imitators could not exhaust,âstill I am
far from wishing to deny that the author of these great poems found a
rich fund of tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse from whence
he might derive both subject and embellishment. But it is one thing to
_use_ existing romances in the embellishment of a poem, another to
patch up the poem itself from such materials. What consistency of style
and execution can be hoped for from such an attempt? or, rather, what
bad taste and tedium will not be the infallible result?

A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other
bards, are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. In
fact, the most original writer is still drawing upon outward
impressionsânay, even his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents
which support and feed the impulses of imagination. But unless there be
some grand pervading principleâsome invisible, yet most distinctly
stamped archetypus of the great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never
come to the birth. Traditions the most picturesque, episodes the most
pathetic, local associations teeming with the thoughts of gods and
great men, may crowd in one mighty vision, or reveal themselves in more
substantial forms to the mind of the poet; but, except the power to
create a grand whole, to which these shall be but as details and
embellishments, be present, we shall have nought but a scrap-book, a
parterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each other in their
wild redundancy: we shall have a cento of rags and tatters, which will
require little acuteness to detect.

Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware
as I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief,
it still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved
for a higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature
intended to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which
the greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were
faith no virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our
ignorance on any matter. But we are too well taught the contrary
lesson; and it seems as though our faith should be especially tried
touching the men and the events which have wrought most influence upon
the condition of humanity. And there is a kind of sacredness attached
to the memory of the great and the good, which seems to bid us repulse
the scepticism which would allegorize their existence into a pleasing
apologue, and measure the giants of intellect by an homeopathic
dynameter.

Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply
wrapped in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots
which mere analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem we must
transform ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination
must fight over the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the
same sense of injury, as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but
attain this degree of enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely
suffice for the reading of Homer), we shall feel that the poems of
Homer are not only the work of one writer, but of the greatest writer
that ever touched the hearts of men by the power of song.

And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems
their powerful influence over the minds of the men of old. Heeren, who
is evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely
observes:â

âIt was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No poet has
ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his countrymen.
Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the character of other
nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that of the Greeks. This is
a feature in their character which was not wholly erased even in the
period of their degeneracy. When lawgivers and sages appeared in
Greece, the work of the poet had already been accomplished; and they
paid homage to his superior genius. He held up before his nation the
mirror, in which they were to behold the world of gods and heroes no
less than of feeble mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity
and truth. His poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature;
on the love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which
outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured forth
from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of man; and
therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every breast which
cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to his immortal spirit,
from another heaven than any of which he dreamed on earth, to look down
on his race, to see the nations from the fields of Asia to the forests
of Hercynia, performing pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic
wand caused to flow; if it is permitted to him to view the vast
assemblage of grand, of elevated, of glorious productions, which had
been called into being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal
spirit may reside, this alone would suffice to complete his
happiness.â[35]

Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the âApotheosis of
Homerâ[36] is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing
association, how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to
our minds, is lost by the admittance of any theory but our old
tradition? The more we read, and the more we thinkâthink as becomes the
readers of Homer,âthe more rooted becomes the conviction that the
Father of Poetry gave us this rich inheritance, whole and entire.
Whatever were the means of its preservation, let us rather be thankful
for the treasury of taste and eloquence thus laid open to our use, than
seek to make it a mere centre around which to drive a series of
theories, whose wildness is only equalled by their inconsistency with
each other.

As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not
included in Popeâs translation, I will content myself with a brief
account of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer
who has done it full justice[37]:â

âThis poem,â says Coleridge, âis a short mock-heroic of ancient date.
The text varies in different editions, and is obviously disturbed and
corrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to have been a juvenile
essay of Homerâs genius; others have attributed it to the same Pigrees,
mentioned above, and whose reputation for humour seems to have invited
the appropriation of any piece of ancient wit, the author of which was
uncertain; so little did the Greeks, before the age of the Ptolemies,
know or care about that department of criticism employed in determining
the genuineness of ancient writings. As to this little poem being a
youthful profusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to say that from the
beginning to the end it is a plain and palpable parody, not only of the
general spirit, but of the numerous passages of the Iliad itself; and
even, if no such intention to parody were discernible in it, the
objection would still remain, that to suppose a work of mere burlesque
to be the primary effort of poetry in a simple age, seems to reverse
that order in the development of national taste, which the history of
every other people in Europe, and of many in Asia, has almost
ascertained to be a law of the human mind; it is in a state of society
much more refined and permanent than that described in the Iliad, that
any popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the gods as is
contained in this poem; and the fact of there having existed three
other poems of the same kind attributed, for aught we can see, with as
much reason to Homer, is a strong inducement to believe that none of
them were of the Homeric age. Knight infers from the usage of the word
deltos, âwriting tablet,â instead of Î´Î¹ÏÎ¸á½³ÏÎ±, âskin,â which, according
to Herod. 5, 58, was the material employed by the Asiatic Greeks for
that purpose, that this poem was another offspring of Attic ingenuity;
and generally that the familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) is a
strong argument against so ancient a date for its composition.â

Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Popeâs
design, I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation,
and on my own purpose in the present edition.

Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby.
It is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his
whole work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes,
which prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical
attainments were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it
is probable that these examinations were the result rather of the
contradictory versions already existing, than of a desire to make a
perfect transcript of the original. And in those days, what is called
literal translation was less cultivated than at present. If something
like the general sense could be decorated with the easy gracefulness of
a practised poet; if the charms of metrical cadence and a pleasing
fluency could be made consistent with a fair interpretation of the
poetâs meaning, his _words_ were less jealously sought for, and those
who could read so good a poem as Popeâs Iliad had fair reason to be
satisfied.

It would be absurd, therefore, to test Popeâs translation by our own
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look at
it as a most delightful work in itself,âa work which is as much a part
of English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be torn
from our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most
cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
á¼Î¼ÏÎ¹Îºá½»ÏÎµÎ»Î»Î¿Î½ being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be it from
us to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapmanâs
fine, bold, rough old English;âfar be it from us to hold up his
translation as what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can still
dismiss Popeâs Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the
consciousness that they must have read a very great number of books
before they have read its fellow.

As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn up
without pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the general
reader. Having some little time since translated all the works of Homer
for another publisher, I might have brought a large amount of
accumulated matter, sometimes of a critical character, to bear upon the
text. But Popeâs version was no field for such a display; and my
purpose was to touch briefly on antiquarian or mythological allusions,
to notice occasionally _some_ departures from the original, and to give
a few parallel passages from our English Homer, Milton. In the latter
task I cannot pretend to novelty, but I trust that my other
annotations, while utterly disclaiming high scholastic views, will be
found to convey as much as is wanted; at least, as far as the necessary
limits of these volumes could be expected to admit. To write a
commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I have made Popeâs
translation a little more entertaining and instructive to a mass of
miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily
accomplished.

THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY.


_Christ Church_.




POPEâS PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER


Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any
writer whatever. The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested
with him, and others may have their pretensions as to particular
excellences; but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it a
wonder if he has ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most
excelled in that which is the very foundation of poetry. It is the
invention that, in different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses:
the utmost stretch of human study, learning, and industry, which
masters everything besides, can never attain to this. It furnishes art
with all her materials, and without it judgment itself can at best but
âsteal wisely:â for art is only like a prudent steward that lives on
managing the riches of nature. Whatever praises may be given to works
of judgment, there is not even a single beauty in them to which the
invention must not contribute: as in the most regular gardens, art can
only reduce beauties of nature to more regularity, and such a figure,
which the common eye may better take in, and is, therefore, more
entertained with. And, perhaps, the reason why common critics are
inclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to a great and
fruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves to pursue
their observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art, than to
comprehend the vast and various extent of nature.

Our authorâs work is a wild paradise, where, if we cannot see all the
beauties so distinctly as in an ordered garden, it is only because the
number of them is infinitely greater. It is like a copious nursery,
which contains the seeds and first productions of every kind, out of
which those who followed him have but selected some particular plants,
each according to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some things
are too luxuriant it is owing to the richness of the soil; and if
others are not arrived to perfection or maturity, it is only because
they are overrun and oppressed by those of a stronger nature.

It is to the strength of this amazing invention we are to attribute
that unequalled fire and rapture which is so forcible in Homer, that no
man of a true poetical spirit is master of himself while he reads him.
What he writes is of the most animated nature imaginable; every thing
moves, every thing lives, and is put in action. If a council be called,
or a battle fought, you are not coldly informed of what was said or
done as from a third person; the reader is hurried out of himself by
the force of the poetâs imagination, and turns in one place to a
hearer, in another to a spectator. The course of his verses resembles
that of the army he describes,

    Îá¼µÎ´â á¼á¿¤ á¼´ÏÎ±Î½, á½¡ÏÎµá½· ÏÎµ ÏÏÏá½¶ ÏÎ¸á½¼Î½ Ïá¼ÏÎ± Î½á½³Î¼Î¿Î¹ÏÎ¿.

âThey pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it.â It
is, however, remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere vigorous,
is not discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in its
fullest splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself and
others, and becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity.
Exact disposition, just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers,
may have been found in a thousand; but this poetic fire, this âvivida
vis animi,â in a very few. Even in works where all those are imperfect
or neglected, this can overpower criticism, and make us admire even
while we disapprove. Nay, where this appears, though attended with
absurdities, it brightens all the rubbish about it, till we see nothing
but its own splendour. This fire is discerned in Virgil, but discerned
as through a glass, reflected from Homer, more shining than fierce, but
everywhere equal and constant: in Lucan and Statius it bursts out in
sudden, short, and interrupted flashes: In Milton it glows like a
furnace kept up to an uncommon ardour by the force of art: in
Shakspeare it strikes before we are aware, like an accidental fire from
heaven: but in Homer, and in him only, it burns everywhere clearly and
everywhere irresistibly.

I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in
a manner superior to that of any poet through all the main constituent
parts of his work: as it is the great and peculiar characteristic which
distinguishes him from all other authors.

This strong and ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in the
violence of its course, drew all things within its vortex. It seemed
not enough to have taken in the whole circle of arts, and the whole
compass of nature, to supply his maxims and reflections; all the inward
passions and affections of mankind, to furnish his characters: and all
the outward forms and images of things for his descriptions: but
wanting yet an ampler sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new and
boundless walk for his imagination, and created a world for himself in
the invention of fable. That which Aristotle calls âthe soul of
poetry,â was first breathed into it by Homer. I shall begin with
considering him in his part, as it is naturally the first; and I speak
of it both as it means the design of a poem, and as it is taken for
fiction.


Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the
marvellous. The probable fable is the recital of such actions as,
though they did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature;
or of such as, though they did, became fables by the additional
episodes and manner of telling them. Of this sort is the main story of
an epic poem, âThe return of Ulysses, the settlement of the Trojans in
Italy,â or the like. That of the Iliad is the âanger of Achilles,â the
most short and single subject that ever was chosen by any poet. Yet
this he has supplied with a vaster variety of incidents and events, and
crowded with a greater number of councils, speeches, battles, and
episodes of all kinds, than are to be found even in those poems whose
schemes are of the utmost latitude and irregularity. The action is
hurried on with the most vehement spirit, and its whole duration
employs not so much as fifty days. Virgil, for want of so warm a
genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive subject, as well as
a greater length of time, and contracting the design of both Homerâs
poems into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his. The
other epic poets have used the same practice, but generally carried it
so far as to superinduce a multiplicity of fables, destroy the unity of
action, and lose their readers in an unreasonable length of time. Nor
is it only in the main design that they have been unable to add to his
invention, but they have followed him in every episode and part of
story. If he has given a regular catalogue of an army, they all draw up
their forces in the same order. If he has funeral games for Patroclus,
Virgil has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit them)
destroys the unity of his actions for those of Archemorus. If Ulysses
visit the shades, the Ãneas of Virgil and Scipio of Silius are sent
after him. If he be detained from his return by the allurements of
Calypso, so is Ãneas by Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida. If Achilles be
absent from the army on the score of a quarrel through half the poem,
Rinaldo must absent himself just as long on the like account. If he
gives his hero a suit of celestial armour, Virgil and Tasso make the
same present to theirs. Virgil has not only observed this close
imitation of Homer, but, where he had not led the way, supplied the
want from other Greek authors. Thus the story of Sinon, and the taking
of Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word from
Pisander, as the loves of Dido and Ãneas are taken from those of Medea
and Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner.


To proceed to the allegorical fableâIf we reflect upon those
innumerable knowledges, those secrets of nature and physical philosophy
which Homer is generally supposed to have wrapped up in his allegories,
what a new and ample scene of wonder may this consideration afford us!
How fertile will that imagination appear, which was able to clothe all
the properties of elements, the qualifications of the mind, the virtues
and vices, in forms and persons, and to introduce them into actions
agreeable to the nature of the things they shadowed! This is a field in
which no succeeding poets could dispute with Homer, and whatever
commendations have been allowed them on this head, are by no means for
their invention in having enlarged his circle, but for their judgment
in having contracted it. For when the mode of learning changed in the
following ages, and science was delivered in a plainer manner, it then
became as reasonable in the more modern poets to lay it aside, as it
was in Homer to make use of it. And perhaps it was no unhappy
circumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that demand
upon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing all
those allegorical parts of a poem.


The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially
the machines of the gods. If Homer was not the first who introduced the
deities (as Herodotus imagines) into the religion of Greece, he seems
the first who brought them into a system of machinery for poetry, and
such a one as makes its greatest importance and dignity: for we find
those authors who have been offended at the literal notion of the gods,
constantly laying their accusation against Homer as the chief support
of it. But whatever cause there might be to blame his machines in a
philosophical or religious view, they are so perfect in the poetic,
that mankind have been ever since contented to follow them: none have
been able to enlarge the sphere of poetry beyond the limits he has set:
every attempt of this nature has proved unsuccessful; and after all the
various changes of times and religions, his gods continue to this day
the gods of poetry.


We come now to the characters of his persons; and here we shall find no
author has ever drawn so many, with so visible and surprising a
variety, or given us such lively and affecting impressions of them.
Every one has something so singularly his own, that no painter could
have distinguished them more by their features, than the poet has by
their manners. Nothing can be more exact than the distinctions he has
observed in the different degrees of virtues and vices. The single
quality of courage is wonderfully diversified in the several characters
of the Iliad. That of Achilles is furious and intractable; that of
Diomede forward, yet listening to advice, and subject to command; that
of Ajax is heavy and self-confiding; of Hector, active and vigilant:
the courage of Agamemnon is inspirited by love of empire and ambition;
that of Menelaus mixed with softness and tenderness for his people: we
find in Idomeneus a plain direct soldier; in Sarpedon a gallant and
generous one. Nor is this judicious and astonishing diversity to be
found only in the principal quality which constitutes the main of each
character, but even in the under parts of it, to which he takes care to
give a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main characters
of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct in this,
that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other natural,
open, and regular. But they have, besides, characters of courage; and
this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference of
his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other
upon experience. It would be endless to produce instances of these
kinds. The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open
manner; they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and,
where they are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to
those of Homer. His characters of valour are much alike; even that of
Turnus seems no way peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; and
we see nothing that differences the courage of Mnestheus from that of
Sergestus, Cloanthus, or the rest. In like manner it may be remarked of
Statiusâs heroes, that an air of impetuosity runs through them all; the
same horrid and savage courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus,
Hippomedon, &c. They have a parity of character, which makes them seem
brothers of one family. I believe when the reader is led into this
tract of reflection, if he will pursue it through the epic and tragic
writers, he will be convinced how infinitely superior, in this point,
the invention of Homer was to that of all others.


The speeches are to be considered as they flow from the characters;
being perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with the manners,
of those who utter them. As there is more variety of characters in the
Iliad, so there is of speeches, than in any other poem. âEverything in
it has mannerâ (as Aristotle expresses it), that is, everything is
acted or spoken. It is hardly credible, in a work of such length, how
small a number of lines are employed in narration. In Virgil the
dramatic part is less in proportion to the narrative, and the speeches
often consist of general reflections or thoughts, which might be
equally just in any personâs mouth upon the same occasion. As many of
his persons have no apparent characters, so many of his speeches escape
being applied and judged by the rule of propriety. We oftener think of
the author himself when we read Virgil, than when we are engaged in
Homer, all which are the effects of a colder invention, that interests
us less in the action described. Homer makes us hearers, and Virgil
leaves us readers.


If, in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the same
presiding faculty is eminent in the sublimity and spirit of his
thoughts. Longinus has given his opinion, that it was in this part
Homer principally excelled. What were alone sufficient to prove the
grandeur and excellence of his sentiments in general, is, that they
have so remarkable a parity with those of the Scripture. Duport, in his
Gnomologia Homerica, has collected innumerable instances of this sort.
And it is with justice an excellent modern writer allows, that if
Virgil has not so many thoughts that are low and vulgar, he has not so
many that are sublime and noble; and that the Roman author seldom rises
into very astonishing sentiments where he is not fired by the Iliad.


If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall find the
invention still predominant. To what else can we ascribe that vast
comprehension of images of every sort, where we see each circumstance
of art, and individual of nature, summoned together by the extent and
fecundity of his imagination to which all things, in their various
views presented themselves in an instant, and had their impressions
taken off to perfection at a heat? Nay, he not only gives us the full
prospects of things, but several unexpected peculiarities and side
views, unobserved by any painter but Homer. Nothing is so surprising as
the descriptions of his battles, which take up no less than half the
Iliad, and are supplied with so vast a variety of incidents, that no
one bears a likeness to another; such different kinds of deaths, that
no two heroes are wounded in the same manner, and such a profusion of
noble ideas, that every battle rises above the last in greatness,
horror, and confusion. It is certain there is not near that number of
images and descriptions in any epic poet, though every one has assisted
himself with a great quantity out of him; and it is evident of Virgil
especially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are not drawn from
his master.


If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright
imagination of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it. We
acknowledge him the father of poetical diction; the first who taught
that âlanguage of the godsâ to men. His expression is like the
colouring of some great masters, which discovers itself to be laid on
boldly, and executed with rapidity. It is, indeed, the strongest and
most glowing imaginable, and touched with the greatest spirit.
Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who had found out
âliving words;â there are in him more daring figures and metaphors than
in any good author whatever. An arrow is âimpatientâ to be on the wing,
a weapon âthirstsâ to drink the blood of an enemy, and the like, yet
his expression is never too big for the sense, but justly great in
proportion to it. It is the sentiment that swells and fills out the
diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it, for in the
same degree that a thought is warmer, an expression will be brighter,
as that is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like glass
in the furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to a
greater clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and the
heat more intense.


To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected
the compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper
to poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted
and filled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise
conduced in some measure to thicken the images. On this last
consideration I cannot but attribute these also to the fruitfulness of
his invention, since (as he has managed them) they are a sort of
supernumerary pictures of the persons or things to which they were
joined. We see the motion of Hectorâs plumes in the epithet
ÎÎ¿ÏÏÎ¸Î±á½·Î¿Î»Î¿Ï, the landscape of Mount Neritus in that of Îá¼°Î½Î¿Ïá½·ÏÏÎ»Î»Î¿Ï,
and so of others, which particular images could not have been insisted
upon so long as to express them in a description (though but of a
single line) without diverting the reader too much from the principal
action or figure. As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these
epithets is a short description.


Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be sensible what a
share of praise is due to his invention in that also. He was not
satisfied with his language as he found it settled in any one part of
Greece, but searched through its different dialects with this
particular view, to beautify and perfect his numbers he considered
these as they had a greater mixture of vowels or consonants, and
accordingly employed them as the verse required either a greater
smoothness or strength. What he most affected was the Ionic, which has
a peculiar sweetness, from its never using contractions, and from its
custom of resolving the diphthongs into two syllables, so as to make
the words open themselves with a more spreading and sonorous fluency.
With this he mingled the Attic contractions, the broader Doric, and the
feebler Ãolic, which often rejects its aspirate, or takes off its
accent, and completed this variety by altering some letters with the
licence of poetry. Thus his measures, instead of being fetters to his
sense, were always in readiness to run along with the warmth of his
rapture, and even to give a further representation of his notions, in
the correspondence of their sounds to what they signified. Out of all
these he has derived that harmony which makes us confess he had not
only the richest head, but the finest ear in the world. This is so
great a truth, that whoever will but consult the tune of his verses,
even without understanding them (with the same sort of diligence as we
daily see practised in the case of Italian operas), will find more
sweetness, variety, and majesty of sound, than in any other language of
poetry. The beauty of his numbers is allowed by the critics to be
copied but faintly by Virgil himself, though they are so just as to
ascribe it to the nature of the Latin tongue: indeed the Greek has some
advantages both from the natural sound of its words, and the turn and
cadence of its verse, which agree with the genius of no other language.
Virgil was very sensible of this, and used the utmost diligence in
working up a more intractable language to whatsoever graces it was
capable of, and, in particular, never failed to bring the sound of his
line to a beautiful agreement with its sense. If the Grecian poet has
not been so frequently celebrated on this account as the Roman, the
only reason is, that fewer critics have understood one language than
the other. Dionysius of Halicarnassus has pointed out many of our
authorâs beauties in this kind, in his treatise of the Composition of
Words. It suffices at present to observe of his numbers, that they flow
with so much ease, as to make one imagine Homer had no other care than
to transcribe as fast as the Muses dictated, and, at the same time,
with so much force and inspiriting vigour, that they awaken and raise
us like the sound of a trumpet. They roll along as a plentiful river,
always in motion, and always full; while we are borne away by a tide of
verse, the most rapid, and yet the most smooth imaginable.


Thus on whatever side we contemplate Homer, what principally strikes us
is his invention. It is that which forms the character of each part of
his work; and accordingly we find it to have made his fable more
extensive and copious than any other, his manners more lively and
strongly marked, his speeches more affecting and transported, his
sentiments more warm and sublime, his images and descriptions more full
and animated, his expression more raised and daring, and his numbers
more rapid and various. I hope, in what has been said of Virgil, with
regard to any of these heads, I have no way derogated from his
character. Nothing is more absurd or endless, than the common method of
comparing eminent writers by an opposition of particular passages in
them, and forming a judgment from thence of their merit upon the whole.
We ought to have a certain knowledge of the principal character and
distinguishing excellence of each: it is in that we are to consider
him, and in proportion to his degree in that we are to admire him. No
author or man ever excelled all the world in more than one faculty; and
as Homer has done this in invention, Virgil has in judgment. Not that
we are to think that Homer wanted judgment, because Virgil had it in a
more eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted invention, because Homer
possessed a larger share of it; each of these great authors had more of
both than perhaps any man besides, and are only said to have less in
comparison with one another. Homer was the greater genius, Virgil the
better artist. In one we most admire the man, in the other the work.
Homer hurries and transports us with a commanding impetuosity; Virgil
leads us with an attractive majesty; Homer scatters with a generous
profusion; Virgil bestows with a careful magnificence; Homer, like the
Nile, pours out his riches with a boundless overflow; Virgil, like a
river in its banks, with a gentle and constant stream. When we behold
their battles, methinks the two poets resemble the heroes they
celebrate. Homer, boundless and resistless as Achilles, bears all
before him, and shines more and more as the tumult increases; Virgil,
calmly daring, like Ãneas, appears undisturbed in the midst of the
action; disposes all about him, and conquers with tranquillity. And
when we look upon their machines, Homer seems like his own Jupiter in
his terrors, shaking Olympus, scattering the lightnings, and firing the
heavens: Virgil, like the same power in his benevolence, counselling
with the gods, laying plans for empires, and regularly ordering his
whole creation.


But after all, it is with great parts, as with great virtues, they
naturally border on some imperfection; and it is often hard to
distinguish exactly where the virtue ends, or the fault begins. As
prudence may sometimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment
decline to coldness; and as magnanimity may run up to profusion or
extravagance, so may a great invention to redundancy or wildness. If we
look upon Homer in this view, we shall perceive the chief objections
against him to proceed from so noble a cause as the excess of this
faculty.


Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon which
so much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds of
probability. Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as with
gigantic bodies, which, exerting themselves with unusual strength,
exceed what is commonly thought the due proportion of parts, to become
miracles in the whole; and, like the old heroes of that make, commit
something near extravagance, amidst a series of glorious and inimitable
performances. Thus Homer has his âspeaking horses;â and Virgil his
âmyrtles distilling blood;â where the latter has not so much as
contrived the easy intervention of a deity to save the probability.


It is owing to the same vast invention, that his similes have been
thought too exuberant and full of circumstances. The force of this
faculty is seen in nothing more, than in its inability to confine
itself to that single circumstance upon which the comparison is
grounded: it runs out into embellishments of additional images, which,
however, are so managed as not to overpower the main one. His similes
are like pictures, where the principal figure has not only its
proportion given agreeable to the original, but is also set off with
occasional ornaments and prospects. The same will account for his
manner of heaping a number of comparisons together in one breath, when
his fancy suggested to him at once so many various and correspondent
images. The reader will easily extend this observation to more
objections of the same kind.


If there are others which seem rather to charge him with a defect or
narrowness of genius, than an excess of it, those seeming defects will
be found upon examination to proceed wholly from the nature of the
times he lived in. Such are his grosser representations of the gods;
and the vicious and imperfect manners of his heroes; but I must here
speak a word of the latter, as it is a point generally carried into
extremes, both by the censurers and defenders of Homer. It must be a
strange partiality to antiquity, to think with Madame Dacier,[38] âthat
those times and manners are so much the more excellent, as they are
more contrary to ours.â Who can be so prejudiced in their favour as to
magnify the felicity of those ages, when a spirit of revenge and
cruelty, joined with the practice of rapine and robbery, reigned
through the world: when no mercy was shown but for the sake of lucre;
when the greatest princes were put to the sword, and their wives and
daughters made slaves and concubines? On the other side, I would not be
so delicate as those modern critics, who are shocked at the servile
offices and mean employments in which we sometimes see the heroes of
Homer engaged. There is a pleasure in taking a view of that simplicity,
in opposition to the luxury of succeeding ages: in beholding monarchs
without their guards; princes tending their flocks, and princesses
drawing water from the springs. When we read Homer, we ought to reflect
that we are reading the most ancient author in the heathen world; and
those who consider him in this light, will double their pleasure in the
perusal of him. Let them think they are growing acquainted with nations
and people that are now no more; that they are stepping almost three
thousand years back into the remotest antiquity, and entertaining
themselves with a clear and surprising vision of things nowhere else to
be found, the only true mirror of that ancient world. By this means
alone their greatest obstacles will vanish; and what usually creates
their dislike, will become a satisfaction.

This consideration may further serve to answer for the constant use of
the same epithets to his gods and heroes; such as the âfar-darting
PhÅbus,â the âblue-eyed Pallas,â the âswift-footed Achilles,â &c.,
which some have censured as impertinent, and tediously repeated. Those
of the gods depended upon the powers and offices then believed to
belong to them; and had contracted a weight and veneration from the
rites and solemn devotions in which they were used: they were a sort of
attributes with which it was a matter of religion to salute them on all
occasions, and which it was an irreverence to omit. As for the epithets
of great men, Mons. Boileau is of opinion, that they were in the nature
of surnames, and repeated as such; for the Greeks having no names
derived from their fathers, were obliged to add some other distinction
of each person; either naming his parents expressly, or his place of
birth, profession, or the like: as Alexander the son of Philip,
Herodotus of Halicarnassus, Diogenes the Cynic, &c. Homer, therefore,
complying with the custom of his country, used such distinctive
additions as better agreed with poetry. And, indeed, we have something
parallel to these in modern times, such as the names of Harold
Harefoot, Edmund Ironside, Edward Longshanks, Edward the Black Prince,
&c. If yet this be thought to account better for the propriety than for
the repetition, I shall add a further conjecture. Hesiod, dividing the
world into its different ages, has placed a fourth age, between the
brazen and the iron one, of âheroes distinct from other men; a divine
race who fought at Thebes and Troy, are called demi-gods, and live by
the care of Jupiter in the islands of the blessed.â[39] Now among the
divine honours which were paid them, they might have this also in
common with the gods, not to be mentioned without the solemnity of an
epithet, and such as might be acceptable to them by celebrating their
families, actions or qualities.

What other cavils have been raised against Homer, are such as hardly
deserve a reply, but will yet be taken notice of as they occur in the
course of the work. Many have been occasioned by an injudicious
endeavour to exalt Virgil; which is much the same, as if one should
think to raise the superstructure by undermining the foundation: one
would imagine, by the whole course of their parallels, that these
critics never so much as heard of Homerâs having written first; a
consideration which whoever compares these two poets ought to have
always in his eye. Some accuse him for the same things which they
overlook or praise in the other; as when they prefer the fable and
moral of the Ãneis to those of the Iliad, for the same reasons which
might set the Odyssey above the Ãneis; as that the hero is a wiser man,
and the action of the one more beneficial to his country than that of
the other; or else they blame him for not doing what he never designed;
as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a prince as Ãneas, when
the very moral of his poem required a contrary character: it is thus
that Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil. Others select
those particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as some
that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of Scaliger
in his Poetics. Others quarrel with what they take for low and mean
expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy and refinement, oftener
from an ignorance of the graces of the original, and then triumph in
the awkwardness of their own translations: this is the conduct of
Perrault in his Parallels. Lastly, there are others, who, pretending to
a fairer proceeding, distinguish between the personal merit of Homer,
and that of his work; but when they come to assign the causes of the
great reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the ignorance of his
times, and the prejudice of those that followed; and in pursuance of
this principle, they make those accidents (such as the contention of
the cities, &c.) to be the causes of his fame, which were in reality
the consequences of his merit. The same might as well be said of
Virgil, or any great author whose general character will infallibly
raise many casual additions to their reputation. This is the method of
Mons. de la Mott; who yet confesses upon the whole that in whatever age
Homer had lived, he must have been the greatest poet of his nation, and
that he may be said in his sense to be the master even of those who
surpassed him.

In all these objections we see nothing that contradicts his title to
the honour of the chief invention: and as long as this (which is indeed
the characteristic of poetry itself) remains unequalled by his
followers, he still continues superior to them. A cooler judgment may
commit fewer faults, and be more approved in the eyes of one sort of
critics: but that warmth of fancy will carry the loudest and most
universal applauses which holds the heart of a reader under the
strongest enchantment. Homer not only appears the inventor of poetry,
but excels all the inventors of other arts, in this, that he has
swallowed up the honour of those who succeeded him. What he has done
admitted no increase, it only left room for contraction or regulation.
He showed all the stretch of fancy at once; and if he has failed in
some of his flights, it was but because he attempted everything. A work
of this kind seems like a mighty tree, which rises from the most
vigorous seed, is improved with industry, flourishes, and produces the
finest fruit: nature and art conspire to raise it; pleasure and profit
join to make it valuable: and they who find the justest faults, have
only said that a few branches which run luxuriant through a richness of
nature, might be lopped into form to give it a more regular appearance.

Having now spoken of the beauties and defects of the original, it
remains to treat of the translation, with the same view to the chief
characteristic. As far as that is seen in the main parts of the poem,
such as the fable, manners, and sentiments, no translator can prejudice
it but by wilful omissions or contractions. As it also breaks out in
every particular image, description, and simile, whoever lessens or too
much softens those, takes off from this chief character. It is the
first grand duty of an interpreter to give his author entire and
unmaimed; and for the rest, the diction and versification only are his
proper province, since these must be his own, but the others he is to
take as he finds them.

It should then be considered what methods may afford some equivalent in
our language for the graces of these in the Greek. It is certain no
literal translation can be just to an excellent original in a superior
language: but it is a great mistake to imagine (as many have done) that
a rash paraphrase can make amends for this general defect; which is no
less in danger to lose the spirit of an ancient, by deviating into the
modern manners of expression. If there be sometimes a darkness, there
is often a light in antiquity, which nothing better preserves than a
version almost literal. I know no liberties one ought to take, but
those which are necessary to transfusing the spirit of the original,
and supporting the poetical style of the translation: and I will
venture to say, there have not been more men misled in former times by
a servile, dull adherence to the letter, than have been deluded in ours
by a chimerical, insolent hope of raising and improving their author.
It is not to be doubted, that the fire of the poem is what a translator
should principally regard, as it is most likely to expire in his
managing: however, it is his safest way to be content with preserving
this to his utmost in the whole, without endeavouring to be more than
he finds his author is, in any particular place. It is a great secret
in writing, to know when to be plain, and when poetical and figurative;
and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will but follow modestly in
his footsteps. Where his diction is bold and lofty, let us raise ours
as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we ought not to
be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the censure of
a mere English critic. Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to have been
more commonly mistaken than the just pitch of his style: some of his
translators having swelled into fustian in a proud confidence of the
sublime; others sunk into flatness, in a cold and timorous notion of
simplicity. Methinks I see these different followers of Homer, some
sweating and straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (the
certain signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping in
his train, while the poet himself is all the time proceeding with an
unaffected and equal majesty before them. However, of the two extremes
one could sooner pardon frenzy than frigidity; no author is to be
envied for such commendations, as he may gain by that character of
style, which his friends must agree together to call simplicity, and
the rest of the world will call dulness. There is a graceful and
dignified simplicity, as well as a bold and sordid one; which differ as
much from each other as the air of a plain man from that of a sloven:
it is one thing to be tricked up, and another not to be dressed at all.
Simplicity is the mean between ostentation and rusticity.

This pure and noble simplicity is nowhere in such perfection as in the
Scripture and our author. One may affirm, with all respect to the
inspired writings, that the Divine Spirit made use of no other words
but what were intelligible and common to men at that time, and in that
part of the world; and, as Homer is the author nearest to those, his
style must of course bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books
than that of any other writer. This consideration (together with what
has been observed of the parity of some of his thoughts) may, methinks,
induce a translator, on the one hand, to give in to several of those
general phrases and manners of expression, which have attained a
veneration even in our language from being used in the Old Testament;
as, on the other, to avoid those which have been appropriated to the
Divinity, and in a manner consigned to mystery and religion.

For a further preservation of this air of simplicity, a particular care
should be taken to express with all plainness those moral sentences and
proverbial speeches which are so numerous in this poet. They have
something venerable, and as I may say, oracular, in that unadorned
gravity and shortness with which they are delivered: a grace which
would be utterly lost by endeavouring to give them what we call a more
ingenious (that is, a more modern) turn in the paraphrase.

Perhaps the mixture of some GrÃ¦cisms and old words after the manner of
Milton, if done without too much affectation, might not have an ill
effect in a version of this particular work, which most of any other
seems to require a venerable, antique cast. But certainly the use of
modern terms of war and government, such as âplatoon, campaign, junto,â
or the like, (into which some of his translators have fallen) cannot be
allowable; those only excepted without which it is impossible to treat
the subjects in any living language.

There are two peculiarities in Homerâs diction, which are a sort of
marks or moles by which every common eye distinguishes him at first
sight; those who are not his greatest admirers look upon them as
defects, and those who are, seemed pleased with them as beauties. I
speak of his compound epithets, and of his repetitions. Many of the
former cannot be done literally into English without destroying the
purity of our language. I believe such should be retained as slide
easily of themselves into an English compound, without violence to the
ear or to the received rules of composition, as well as those which
have received a sanction from the authority of our best poets, and are
become familiar through their use of them; such as âthe
cloud-compelling Jove,â &c. As for the rest, whenever any can be as
fully and significantly expressed in a single word as in a compounded
one, the course to be taken is obvious.

Some that cannot be so turned, as to preserve their full image by one
or two words, may have justice done them by circumlocution; as the
epithet einosiphyllos to a mountain, would appear little or ridiculous
translated literally âleaf-shaking,â but affords a majestic idea in the
periphrasis: âthe lofty mountain shakes his waving woods.â Others that
admit of different significations, may receive an advantage from a
judicious variation, according to the occasions on which they are
introduced. For example, the epithet of Apollo, á¼ÎºÎ·Î²á½¹Î»Î¿Ï or
âfar-shooting,â is capable of two explications; one literal, in respect
of the darts and bow, the ensigns of that god; the other allegorical,
with regard to the rays of the sun; therefore, in such places where
Apollo is represented as a god in person, I would use the former
interpretation; and where the effects of the sun are described, I would
make choice of the latter. Upon the whole, it will be necessary to
avoid that perpetual repetition of the same epithets which we find in
Homer, and which, though it might be accommodated (as has been already
shown) to the ear of those times, is by no means so to ours: but one
may wait for opportunities of placing them, where they derive an
additional beauty from the occasions on which they are employed; and in
doing this properly, a translator may at once show his fancy and his
judgment.

As for Homerâs repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of
whole narrations and speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse or
hemistitch. I hope it is not impossible to have such a regard to these,
as neither to lose so known a mark of the author on the one hand, nor
to offend the reader too much on the other. The repetition is not
ungraceful in those speeches, where the dignity of the speaker renders
it a sort of insolence to alter his words; as in the messages from gods
to men, or from higher powers to inferiors in concerns of state, or
where the ceremonial of religion seems to require it, in the solemn
forms of prayers, oaths, or the like. In other cases, I believe the
best rule is, to be guided by the nearness, or distance, at which the
repetitions are placed in the original: when they follow too close, one
may vary the expression; but it is a question, whether a professed
translator be authorized to omit any: if they be tedious, the author is
to answer for it.

It only remains to speak of the versification. Homer (as has been said)
is perpetually applying the sound to the sense, and varying it on every
new subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite beauties of
poetry, and attainable by very few: I only know of Homer eminent for it
in the Greek, and Virgil in the Latin. I am sensible it is what may
sometimes happen by chance, when a writer is warm, and fully possessed
of his image: however, it may reasonably be believed they designed
this, in whose verse it so manifestly appears in a superior degree to
all others. Few readers have the ear to be judges of it: but those who
have, will see I have endeavoured at this beauty.

Upon the whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doing
justice to Homer. I attempt him in no other hope but that which one may
entertain without much vanity, of giving a more tolerable copy of him
than any entire translation in verse has yet done. We have only those
of Chapman, Hobbes, and Ogilby. Chapman has taken the advantage of an
immeasurable length of verse, notwithstanding which, there is scarce
any paraphrase more loose and rambling than his. He has frequent
interpolations of four or six lines; and I remember one in the
thirteenth book of the Odyssey, ver. 312, where he has spun twenty
verses out of two. He is often mistaken in so bold a manner, that one
might think he deviated on purpose, if he did not in other places of
his notes insist so much upon verbal trifles. He appears to have had a
strong affectation of extracting new meanings out of his author;
insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of the mysteries
he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to strain the
obvious sense to this end. His expression is involved in fustian; a
fault for which he was remarkable in his original writings, as in the
tragedy of Bussy dâAmboise, &c. In a word, the nature of the man may
account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface and
remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in poetry.
His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than fifteen
weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But that
which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover
his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation,
which is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have
writ before he arrived at years of discretion.

Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but
for particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often
omits the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close
translation, I doubt not many have been led into that error by the
shortness of it, which proceeds not from his following the original
line by line, but from the contractions above mentioned. He sometimes
omits whole similes and sentences; and is now and then guilty of
mistakes, into which no writer of his learning could have fallen, but
through carelessness. His poetry, as well as Ogilbyâs, is too mean for
criticism.

It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did not live
to translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a small
part of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly
interpreted the sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be
excused on account of the haste he was obliged to write in. He seems to
have had too much regard to Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies,
and has unhappily followed him in passages where he wanders from the
original. However, had he translated the whole work, I would no more
have attempted Homer after him than Virgil: his version of whom
(notwithstanding some human errors) is the most noble and spirited
translation I know in any language. But the fate of great geniuses is
like that of great ministers: though they are confessedly the first in
the commonwealth of letters, they must be envied and calumniated only
for being at the head of it.

That which, in my opinion, ought to be the endeavour of any one who
translates Homer, is above all things to keep alive that spirit and
fire which makes his chief character: in particular places, where the
sense can bear any doubt, to follow the strongest and most poetical, as
most agreeing with that character; to copy him in all the variations of
his style, and the different modulations of his numbers; to preserve,
in the more active or descriptive parts, a warmth and elevation; in the
more sedate or narrative, a plainness and solemnity; in the speeches, a
fulness and perspicuity; in the sentences, a shortness and gravity; not
to neglect even the little figures and turns on the words, nor
sometimes the very cast of the periods; neither to omit nor confound
any rites or customs of antiquity: perhaps too he ought to include the
whole in a shorter compass than has hitherto been done by any
translator who has tolerably preserved either the sense or poetry. What
I would further recommend to him is, to study his author rather from
his own text, than from any commentaries, how learned soever, or
whatever figure they may make in the estimation of the world; to
consider him attentively in comparison with Virgil above all the
ancients, and with Milton above all the moderns. Next these, the
Archbishop of Cambrayâs Telemachus may give him the truest idea of the
spirit and turn of our author; and Bossuâs admirable Treatise of the
Epic Poem the justest notion of his design and conduct. But after all,
with whatever judgment and study a man may proceed, or with whatever
happiness he may perform such a work, he must hope to please but a few;
those only who have at once a taste of poetry, and competent learning.
For to satisfy such a want either, is not in the nature of this
undertaking; since a mere modern wit can like nothing that is not
modern, and a pedant nothing that is not Greek.

What I have done is submitted to the public; from whose opinions I am
prepared to learn; though I fear no judges so little as our best poets,
who are most sensible of the weight of this task. As for the worst,
whatever they shall please to say, they may give me some concern as
they are unhappy men, but none as they are malignant writers. I was
guided in this translation by judgments very different from theirs, and
by persons for whom they can have no kindness, if an old observation be
true, that the strongest antipathy in the world is that of fools to men
of wit. Mr. Addison was the first whose advice determined me to
undertake this task; who was pleased to write to me upon that occasion
in such terms as I cannot repeat without vanity. I was obliged to Sir
Richard Steele for a very early recommendation of my undertaking to the
public. Dr. Swift promoted my interest with that warmth with which he
always serves his friend. The humanity and frankness of Sir Samuel
Garth are what I never knew wanting on any occasion. I must also
acknowledge, with infinite pleasure, the many friendly offices, as well
as sincere criticisms, of Mr. Congreve, who had led me the way in
translating some parts of Homer. I must add the names of Mr. Rowe, and
Dr. Parnell, though I shall take a further opportunity of doing justice
to the last, whose good nature (to give it a great panegyric), is no
less extensive than his learning. The favour of these gentlemen is not
entirely undeserved by one who bears them so true an affection. But
what can I say of the honour so many of the great have done me; while
the first names of the age appear as my subscribers, and the most
distinguished patrons and ornaments of learning as my chief
encouragers? Among these it is a particular pleasure to me to find,
that my highest obligations are to such who have done most honour to
the name of poet: that his grace the Duke of Buckingham was not
displeased I should undertake the author to whom he has given (in his
excellent Essay), so complete a praise:

âRead Homer once, and you can read no more;
For all books else appear so mean, so poor,
Verse will seem prose: but still persist to read,
And Homer will be all the books you need.â


That the Earl of Halifax was one of the first to favour me; of whom it
is hard to say whether the advancement of the polite arts is more owing
to his generosity or his example: that such a genius as my Lord
Bolingbroke, not more distinguished in the great scenes of business,
than in all the useful and entertaining parts of learning, has not
refused to be the critic of these sheets, and the patron of their
writer: and that the noble author of the tragedy of âHeroic Loveâ has
continued his partiality to me, from my writing pastorals to my
attempting the Iliad. I cannot deny myself the pride of confessing,
that I have had the advantage not only of their advice for the conduct
in general, but their correction of several particulars of this
translation.

I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being distinguished by the
Earl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize any one
generous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series of
them. Mr. Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon my
desire of having it known that he was pleased to promote this affair.
The particular zeal of Mr. Harcourt (the son of the late Lord
Chancellor) gave me a proof how much I am honoured in a share of his
friendship. I must attribute to the same motive that of several others
of my friends: to whom all acknowledgments are rendered unnecessary by
the privileges of a familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I can
no way better oblige men of their turn than by my silence.

In short, I have found more patrons than ever Homer wanted. He would
have thought himself happy to have met the same favour at Athens that
has been shown me by its learned rival, the University of Oxford. And I
can hardly envy him those pompous honours he received after death, when
I reflect on the enjoyment of so many agreeable obligations, and easy
friendships, which make the satisfaction of life. This distinction is
the more to be acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose pen has never
gratified the prejudices of particular parties, or the vanities of
particular men. Whatever the success may prove, I shall never repent of
an undertaking in which I have experienced the candour and friendship
of so many persons of merit; and in which I hope to pass some of those
years of youth that are generally lost in a circle of follies, after a
manner neither wholly unuseful to others, nor disagreeable to myself.




THE ILIAD.




BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.[40]


THE CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.


In the war of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighbouring
towns, and taken from thence two beautiful captives, ChryseÃ¯s and
BriseÃ¯s, allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to Achilles.
Chryses, the father of ChryseÃ¯s, and priest of Apollo, comes to the
Grecian camp to ransom her; with which the action of the poem opens, in
the tenth year of the siege. The priest being refused, and insolently
dismissed by Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god; who
inflicts a pestilence on the Greeks. Achilles calls a council, and
encourages Chalcas to declare the cause of it; who attributes it to the
refusal of ChryseÃ¯s. The king, being obliged to send back his captive,
enters into a furious contest with Achilles, which Nestor pacifies;
however, as he had the absolute command of the army, he seizes on
BriseÃ¯s in revenge. Achilles in discontent withdraws himself and his
forces from the rest of the Greeks; and complaining to Thetis, she
supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of the wrong done to her
son, by giving victory to the Trojans. Jupiter, granting her suit,
incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs high, till they are
reconciled by the address of Vulcan.
    The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine
    during the plague, one in the council and quarrel of the princes,
    and twelve for Jupiterâs stay with the Ãthiopians, at whose return
    Thetis prefers her petition. The scene lies in the Grecian camp,
    then changes to Chrysa, and lastly to Olympus.


Achillesâ wrath, to Greece the direful spring
Of woes unnumberâd, heavenly goddess, sing!
That wrath which hurlâd to Plutoâs gloomy reign
The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.[41]
Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove![42]

Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour[43]
Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power
Latonaâs son a dire contagion spread,[44]
And heapâd the camp with mountains of the dead;
The king of men his reverent priest defied,[45]
And for the kingâs offence the people died.

For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
His captive daughter from the victorâs chain.
Suppliant the venerable father stands;
Apolloâs awful ensigns grace his hands:
By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown.
He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
The brother-kings, of Atreusâ royal race[46]

âYe kings and warriors! may your vows be crownâd,
And Troyâs proud walls lie level with the ground.
May Jove restore you when your toils are oâer
Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
But, oh! relieve a wretched parentâs pain,
And give ChryseÃ¯s to these arms again;
If mercy fail, yet let my presents move,
And dread avenging PhÅbus, son of Jove.â

The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare,
The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,
Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied:
âHence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,
Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains:

Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.
Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;
And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;
Till time shall rifle every youthful grace,
And age dismiss her from my cold embrace,
In daily labours of the loom employâd,
Or doomâd to deck the bed she once enjoyâd.
Hence then; to Argos shall the maid retire,
Far from her native soil and weeping sire.â


[Illustration: ] HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE


The trembling priest along the shore returnâd,
And in the anguish of a father mournâd.
Disconsolate, not daring to complain,
Silent he wanderâd by the sounding main;
Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays,
The god who darts around the world his rays.

âO Smintheus! sprung from fair Latonaâs line,[47]
Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,[48]
Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores,
And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysaâs shores.
If eâer with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,[49]
Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain;
God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ,
Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy.â

Thus Chryses prayâd:âthe favouring power attends,
And from Olympusâ lofty tops descends.
Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;[50]
Fierce as he moved, his silver shafts resound.
Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread,
And gloomy darkness rollâd about his head.
The fleet in view, he twangâd his deadly bow,
And hissing fly the featherâd fates below.
On mules and dogs the infection first began;[51]
And last, the vengeful arrows fixâd in man.
For nine long nights, through all the dusky air,
The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal glare.
But ere the tenth revolving day was run,
Inspired by Juno, Thetisâ godlike son
Convened to council all the Grecian train;
For much the goddess mournâd her heroes slain.[52]
The assembly seated, rising oâer the rest,
Achilles thus the king of men addressâd:

âWhy leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,
And measure back the seas we crossâd before?
The plague destroying whom the sword would spare,
âTis time to save the few remains of war.
But let some prophet, or some sacred sage,
Explore the cause of great Apolloâs rage;
Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove
By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.[53]
If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore,
And PhÅbus dart his burning shafts no more.â

He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;
Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
The past, the present, and the future knew:
Uprising slow, the venerable sage
Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age:

âBeloved of Jove, Achilles! wouldâst thou know
Why angry PhÅbus bends his fatal bow?
First give thy faith, and plight a princeâs word
Of sure protection, by thy power and sword:
For I must speak what wisdom would conceal,
And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,
Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise,
Instruct a monarch where his error lies;
For though we deem the short-lived fury past,
âTis sure the mighty will revenge at last.â
To whom Pelides:ââFrom thy inmost soul
Speak what thou knowâst, and speak without control.
Eâen by that god I swear who rules the day,
To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey.
And whose blessâd oracles thy lips declare;
Long as Achilles breathes this vital air,
No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,
Against his priest shall lift an impious hand;
Not eâen the chief by whom our hosts are led,
The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head.â

Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies:
âNor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,
But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest,
Apolloâs vengeance for his injured priest.
Nor will the godâs awakenâd fury cease,
But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.[54]
Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,
The priest may pardon, and the god may spare.â

The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown
The monarch started from his shining throne;
Black choler fillâd his breast that boilâd with ire,
And from his eye-balls flashâd the living fire:
âAugur accursed! denouncing mischief still,
Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!
Still must that tongue some wounding message bring,
And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king?
For this are PhÅbusâ oracles explored,
To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord?
For this with falsehood is my honour stainâd,
Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned;
Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold,
And heavenly charms prefer to profferâd gold?
A maid, unmatchâd in manners as in face,
Skillâd in each art, and crownâd with every grace;
Not half so dear were ClytÃ¦mnestraâs charms,
When first her blooming beauties blessâd my arms.
Yet, if the gods demand her, let her sail;
Our cares are only for the public weal:
Let me be deemâd the hateful cause of all,
And suffer, rather than my people fall.
The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign,
So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
But since for common good I yield the fair,
My private loss let grateful Greece repair;
Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
That he alone has fought and bled in vain.â
âInsatiate king (Achilles thus replies),
Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
Wouldâst thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,
The due reward of many a well-fought field?

The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,
We share with justice, as with toil we gain;
But to resume whateâer thy avarice craves
(That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
Yet if our chief for plunder only fight,
The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,
Wheneâer, by Joveâs decree, our conquering powers
Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers.â

Then thus the king: âShall I my prize resign
With tame content, and thou possessâd of thine?
Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,
Think not to rob me of a soldierâs right.
At thy demand shall I restore the maid?
First let the just equivalent be paid;
Such as a king might ask; and let it be
A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
Or grant me this, or with a monarchâs claim
This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;[55]
Ulyssesâ spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
But this when time requires.âIt now remains
We launch a bark to plough the watery plains,
And waft the sacrifice to Chrysaâs shores,
With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,
And some deputed prince the charge attend:
This Cretaâs king, or Ajax shall fulfil,
Or wise Ulysses see performâd our will;
Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,
Achillesâ self conduct her oâer the main;
Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
The god propitiate, and the pest assuage.â


[Illustration: ] MARS


At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied:
âO tyrant, armâd with insolence and pride!
Inglorious slave to interest, ever joinâd
With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
What generous Greek, obedient to thy word,
Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?
What cause have I to war at thy decree?
The distant Trojans never injured me;
To Phthiaâs realms no hostile troops they led:
Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed;
Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main,
And walls of rocks, secure my native reign,
Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace,
Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.
Hither we sailâd, a voluntary throng,
To avenge a private, not a public wrong:
What else to Troy the assembled nations draws,
But thine, ungrateful, and thy brotherâs cause?
Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve;
Disgraced and injured by the man we serve?
And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away,
Due to the deeds of many a dreadful day?
A prize as small, O tyrant! matchâd with thine,
As thy own actions if compared to mine.
Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey,
Though mine the sweat and danger of the day.
Some trivial present to my ships I bear:
Or barren praises pay the wounds of war.
But know, proud monarch, Iâm thy slave no more;
My fleet shall waft me to Thessaliaâs shore:
Left by Achilles on the Trojan plain,
What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?â

To this the king: âFly, mighty warrior! fly;
Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.
There want not chiefs in such a cause to fight,
And Jove himself shall guard a monarchâs right.
Of all the kings (the godâs distinguishâd care)
To power superior none such hatred bear:
Strife and debate thy restless soul employ,
And wars and horrors are thy savage joy,
If thou hast strength, âtwas Heaven that strength bestowâd;
For know, vain man! thy valour is from God.
Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed away;
Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway;
I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate
Thy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate.
Go, threat thy earth-born Myrmidons:âbut here[56]
âTis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear.
Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand,
My bark shall waft her to her native land;
But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare,
Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive fair:
Even in thy tent Iâll seize the blooming prize,
Thy loved BriseÃ¯s with the radiant eyes.
Hence shalt thou prove my might, and curse the hour
Thou stoodâst a rival of imperial power;
And hence, to all our hosts it shall be known,
That kings are subject to the gods alone.â

Achilles heard, with grief and rage oppressâd,
His heart swellâd high, and labourâd in his breast;
Distracting thoughts by turns his bosom ruled;
Now fired by wrath, and now by reason coolâd:
That prompts his hand to draw the deadly sword,
Force through the Greeks, and pierce their haughty lord;
This whispers soft his vengeance to control,
And calm the rising tempest of his soul.
Just as in anguish of suspense he stayâd,
While half unsheathed appearâd the glittering blade,[57]
Minerva swift descended from above,
Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove
(For both the princes claimâd her equal care);
Behind she stood, and by the golden hair
Achilles seized; to him alone confessâd;
A sable cloud concealâd her from the rest.
He sees, and sudden to the goddess cries,
Known by the flames that sparkle from her eyes:


[Illustration: ] MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES


âDescends Minerva, in her guardian care,
A heavenly witness of the wrongs I bear
From Atreusâ son?âThen let those eyes that view
The daring crime, behold the vengeance too.â

âForbear (the progeny of Jove replies)
To calm thy fury I forsake the skies:
Let great Achilles, to the gods resignâd,
To reason yield the empire oâer his mind.
By awful Juno this command is given;
The king and you are both the care of heaven.
The force of keen reproaches let him feel;
But sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel.
For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power)
Thy injured honour has its fated hour,
When the proud monarch shall thy arms implore,
And bribe thy friendship with a boundless store.
Then let revenge no longer bear the sway;
Command thy passions, and the gods obey.â

To her Pelides:ââWith regardful ear,
âTis just, O goddess! I thy dictates hear.
Hard as it is, my vengeance I suppress:
Those who revere the gods the gods will bless.â
He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid;
Then in the sheath returnâd the shining blade.
The goddess swift to high Olympus flies,
And joins the sacred senate of the skies.

Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook,
Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke:
âO monster! mixâd of insolence and fear,
Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
When wert thou known in ambushâd fights to dare,
Or nobly face the horrid front of war?
âTis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try;
Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die:
So much âtis safer through the camp to go,
And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
Sent in Joveâs anger on a slavish race;
Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past,
Are tamed to wrongs;âor this had been thy last.
Now by this sacred sceptre hear me swear,
Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
Which severâd from the trunk (as I from thee)
On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
This sceptre, formâd by temperâd steel to prove
An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
From whom the power of laws and justice springs
(Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings);
By this I swear:âwhen bleeding Greece again
Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
When, flushâd with slaughter, Hector comes to spread
The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
Then shalt thou mourn the affront thy madness gave,
Forced to deplore when impotent to save:
Then rage in bitterness of soul to know
This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe.â

He spoke; and furious hurlâd against the ground
His sceptre starrâd with golden studs around:
Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain
The raging king returnâd his frowns again.

To calm their passion with the words of age,
Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,
Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skillâd;
Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distillâd:[58]
Two generations now had passâd away,
Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
Two ages oâer his native realm he reignâd,
And now the example of the third remainâd.
All viewâd with awe the venerable man;
Who thus with mild benevolence began:â

âWhat shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy
To Troyâs proud monarch, and the friends of Troy!
That adverse gods commit to stern debate
The best, the bravest, of the Grecian state.
Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain,
Nor think your Nestorâs years and wisdom vain.
A godlike race of heroes once I knew,
Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!
Lives there a chief to match Pirithousâ fame,
Dryas the bold, or Ceneusâ deathless name;
Theseus, endued with more than mortal might,
Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?
With these of old, to toils of battle bred,
In early youth my hardy days I led;
Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breeds,
And smit with love of honourable deeds,
Strongest of men, they pierced the mountain boar,
Ranged the wild deserts red with monstersâ gore,
And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore:
Yet these with soft persuasive arts I swayâd;
When Nestor spoke, they listenâd and obeyâd.
If in my youth, even these esteemâd me wise;
Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise.
Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave;
That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave:
Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride;
Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside.
Thee, the first honours of the war adorn,
Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born;
Him, awful majesty exalts above
The powers of earth, and sceptred sons of Jove.
Let both unite with well-consenting mind,
So shall authority with strength be joinâd.
Leave me, O king! to calm Achillesâ rage;
Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.
Forbid it, gods! Achilles should be lost,
The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host.â

This said, he ceased. The king of men replies:
âThy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
But that imperious, that unconquerâd soul,
No laws can limit, no respect control.
Before his pride must his superiors fall;
His word the law, and he the lord of all?
Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?
What king can bear a rival in his sway?
Grant that the gods his matchless force have given;
Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?â

Here on the monarchâs speech Achilles broke,
And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke:
âTyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain,
To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain,
Should I submit to each unjust decree:â
Command thy vassals, but command not me.
Seize on BriseÃ¯s, whom the Grecians doomâd
My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed;
And seize secure; no more Achilles draws
His conquering sword in any womanâs cause.
The gods command me to forgive the past:
But let this first invasion be the last:
For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade,
Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade.â

At this they ceased: the stern debate expired:
The chiefs in sullen majesty retired.

Achilles with Patroclus took his way
Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
Meantime Atrides launchâd with numerous oars
A well-riggâd ship for Chrysaâs sacred shores:
High on the deck was fair ChryseÃ¯s placed,
And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced:
Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stowâd,
Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.

The host to expiate next the king prepares,
With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
Washâd by the briny wave, the pious train[59]
Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.
Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid,
And bulls and goats to PhÅbusâ altars paid;
The sable fumes in curling spires arise,
And waft their grateful odours to the skies.

The army thus in sacred rites engaged,
Atrides still with deep resentment raged.
To wait his will two sacred heralds stood,
Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
âHaste to the fierce Achillesâ tent (he cries),
Thence bear BriseÃ¯s as our royal prize:
Submit he must; or if they will not part,
Ourself in arms shall tear her from his heart.â

The unwilling heralds act their lordâs commands;
Pensive they walk along the barren sands:
Arrived, the hero in his tent they find,
With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined.
At awful distance long they silent stand,
Loth to advance, and speak their hard command;
Decent confusion! This the godlike man
Perceived, and thus with accent mild began:

âWith leave and honour enter our abodes,
Ye sacred ministers of men and gods![60]
I know your message; by constraint you came;
Not you, but your imperious lord I blame.
Patroclus, haste, the fair BriseÃ¯s bring;
Conduct my captive to the haughty king.
But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow,
Witness to gods above, and men below!
But first, and loudest, to your prince declare
(That lawless tyrant whose commands you bear),
Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain,
Though prostrate Greece shall bleed at every vein:
The raging chief in frantic passion lost,
Blind to himself, and useless to his host,
Unskillâd to judge the future by the past,
In blood and slaughter shall repent at last.â


[Illustration: ] THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES


Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought;
She, in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought,
Passâd silent, as the heralds held her hand,
And oft lookâd back, slow-moving oâer the strand.
Not so his loss the fierce Achilles bore;
But sad, retiring to the sounding shore,
Oâer the wild margin of the deep he hung,
That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:[61]
There bathed in tears of anger and disdain,
Thus loud lamented to the stormy main:

âO parent goddess! since in early bloom
Thy son must fall, by too severe a doom;
Sure to so short a race of glory born,
Great Jove in justice should this span adorn:
Honour and fame at least the thunderer owed;
And ill he pays the promise of a god,
If yon proud monarch thus thy son defies,
Obscures my glories, and resumes my prize.â

Far from the deep recesses of the main,
Where aged Ocean holds his watery reign,
The goddess-mother heard. The waves divide;
And like a mist she rose above the tide;
Beheld him mourning on the naked shores,
And thus the sorrows of his soul explores.
âWhy grieves my son? Thy anguish let me share;
Reveal the cause, and trust a parentâs care.â

He deeply sighing said: âTo tell my woe
Is but to mention what too well you know.
From ThebÃ©, sacred to Apolloâs name[62]
(AÃ«tionâs realm), our conquering army came,
With treasure loaded and triumphant spoils,
Whose just division crownâd the soldierâs toils;
But bright ChryseÃ¯s, heavenly prize! was led,
By vote selected, to the generalâs bed.
The priest of PhÅbus sought by gifts to gain
His beauteous daughter from the victorâs chain;
The fleet he reachâd, and, lowly bending down,
Held forth the sceptre and the laurel crown,
Intreating all; but chief implored for grace
The brother-kings of Atreusâ royal race:
The generous Greeks their joint consent declare,
The priest to reverence, and release the fair;
Not so Atrides: he, with wonted pride,
The sire insulted, and his gifts denied:
The insulted sire (his godâs peculiar care)
To PhÅbus prayâd, and PhÅbus heard the prayer:
A dreadful plague ensues: the avenging darts
Incessant fly, and pierce the Grecian hearts.
A prophet then, inspired by heaven, arose,
And points the crime, and thence derives the woes:
Myself the first the assembled chiefs incline
To avert the vengeance of the power divine;
Then rising in his wrath, the monarch stormâd;
Incensed he threatenâd, and his threats performâd:
The fair ChryseÃ¯s to her sire was sent,
With offerâd gifts to make the god relent;
But now he seized BriseÃ¯sâ heavenly charms,
And of my valourâs prize defrauds my arms,
Defrauds the votes of all the Grecian train;[63]
And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain.
But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.
To high Olympusâ shining court ascend,
Urge all the ties to former service owed,
And sue for vengeance to the thundering god.
Oft hast thou triumphâd in the glorious boast,
That thou stoodâst forth of all the ethereal host,
When bold rebellion shook the realms above,
The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:
When the bright partner of his awful reign,
The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,
The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven,
Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
Then, callâd by thee, the monster Titan came
(Whom gods Briareus, men Ãgeon name),
Through wondering skies enormous stalkâd along;
Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong:
With giant-pride at Joveâs high throne he stands,
And brandishâd round him all his hundred hands:
The affrighted gods confessâd their awful lord,
They droppâd the fetters, trembled, and adored.[64]
This, goddess, this to his remembrance call,
Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;
Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,
To heap the shores with copious death, and bring
The Greeks to know the curse of such a king.
Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head
Oâer all his wide dominion of the dead,
And mourn in blood that eâer he durst disgrace
The boldest warrior of the Grecian race.â


[Illustration: ] THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER


âUnhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies,
While tears celestial trickle from her eyes)
Why have I borne thee with a motherâs throes,
To Fates averse, and nursed for future woes?[65]
So short a space the light of heaven to view!
So short a space! and fillâd with sorrow too!
O might a parentâs careful wish prevail,
Far, far from Ilion should thy vessels sail,
And thou, from camps remote, the danger shun
Which now, alas! too nearly threats my son.
Yet (what I can) to move thy suit Iâll go
To great Olympus crownâd with fleecy snow.
Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far
Behold the field, not mingle in the war.
The sire of gods and all the ethereal train,
On the warm limits of the farthest main,
Now mix with mortals, nor disdain to grace
The feasts of Ãthiopiaâs blameless race,[66]
Twelve days the powers indulge the genial rite,
Returning with the twelfth revolving light.
Then will I mount the brazen dome, and move
The high tribunal of immortal Jove.â

The goddess spoke: the rolling waves unclose;
Then down the steep she plunged from whence she rose,
And left him sorrowing on the lonely coast,
In wild resentment for the fair he lost.

In Chrysaâs port now sage Ulysses rode;
Beneath the deck the destined victims stowâd:
The sails they furlâd, they lash the mast aside,
And droppâd their anchors, and the pinnace tied.
Next on the shore their hecatomb they land;
ChryseÃ¯s last descending on the strand.
Her, thus returning from the furrowâd main,
Ulysses led to PhÅbusâ sacred fane;
Where at his solemn altar, as the maid
He gave to Chryses, thus the hero said:

âHail, reverend priest! to PhÅbusâ awful dome
A suppliant I from great Atrides come:
Unransomâd, here receive the spotless fair;
Accept the hecatomb the Greeks prepare;
And may thy god who scatters darts around,
Atoned by sacrifice, desist to wound.â[67]

At this, the sire embraced the maid again,
So sadly lost, so lately sought in vain.
Then near the altar of the darting king,
Disposed in rank their hecatomb they bring;
With water purify their hands, and take
The sacred offering of the salted cake;
While thus with arms devoutly raised in air,
And solemn voice, the priest directs his prayer:

âGod of the silver bow, thy ear incline,
Whose power incircles Cilla the divine;
Whose sacred eye thy Tenedos surveys,
And gilds fair Chrysa with distinguishâd rays!
If, fired to vengeance at thy priestâs request,
Thy direful darts inflict the raging pest:
Once more attend! avert the wasteful woe,
And smile propitious, and unbend thy bow.â

So Chryses prayâd. Apollo heard his prayer:
And now the Greeks their hecatomb prepare;
Between their horns the salted barley threw,
And, with their heads to heaven, the victims slew:[68]
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide;
The thighs, selected to the gods, divide:
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
The priest himself before his altar stands,
And burns the offering with his holy hands.
Pours the black wine, and sees the flames aspire;
The youth with instruments surround the fire:
The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dressâd,
The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest:
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare;
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
When now the rage of hunger was repressâd,
With pure libations they conclude the feast;
The youths with wine the copious goblets crownâd,[69]
And, pleased, dispense the flowing bowls around
With hymns divine the joyous banquet ends,
The pÃ¦ans lengthenâd till the sun descends:
The Greeks, restored, the grateful notes prolong;
Apollo listens, and approves the song.

âTwas night; the chiefs beside their vessel lie,
Till rosy morn had purpled oâer the sky:
Then launch, and hoist the mast: indulgent gales,
Supplied by PhÅbus, fill the swelling sails;
The milk-white canvas bellying as they blow,
The parted ocean foams and roars below:
Above the bounding billows swift they flew,
Till now the Grecian camp appearâd in view.
Far on the beach they haul their bark to land,
(The crooked keel divides the yellow sand,)
Then part, where stretchâd along the winding bay,
The ships and tents in mingled prospect lay.

But raging still, amidst his navy sat
The stern Achilles, stedfast in his hate;
Nor mixâd in combat, nor in council joinâd;
But wasting cares lay heavy on his mind:
In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll,
And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul.

Twelve days were past, and now the dawning light
The gods had summonâd to the Olympian height:
Jove, first ascending from the watery bowers,
Leads the long order of ethereal powers.
When, like the morning-mist in early day,
Rose from the flood the daughter of the sea:
And to the seats divine her flight addressâd.
There, far apart, and high above the rest,
The thunderer sat; where old Olympus shrouds
His hundred heads in heaven, and props the clouds.
Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed
Beneath his beard, and one his knees embraced.
âIf eâer, O father of the gods! (she said)
My words could please thee, or my actions aid,
Some marks of honour on my son bestow,
And pay in glory what in life you owe.
Fame is at least by heavenly promise due
To life so short, and now dishonourâd too.
Avenge this wrong, O ever just and wise!
Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans rise;
Till the proud king and all the Achaian race
Shall heap with honours him they now disgrace.â


[Illustration: ] THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES


Thus Thetis spoke; but Jove in silence held
The sacred counsels of his breast concealâd.
Not so repulsed, the goddess closer pressâd,
Still graspâd his knees, and urged the dear request.
âO sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear;
Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
Or oh! declare, of all the powers above,
Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?â

She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies,
Who rolls the thunder oâer the vaulted skies:

âWhat hast thou askâd? ah, why should Jove engage
In foreign contests and domestic rage,
The godsâ complaints, and Junoâs fierce alarms,
While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms?
Go, lest the haughty partner of my sway
With jealous eyes thy close access survey;
But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped:
Witness the sacred honours of our head,
The nod that ratifies the will divine,
The faithful, fixâd, irrevocable sign;
This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vowsââ
He spoke, and awful bends his sable brows,[70]
Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod,
The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:
High heaven with trembling the dread signal took,
And all Olympus to the centre shook.[71]

Swift to the seas profound the goddess flies,
Jove to his starry mansions in the skies.
The shining synod of the immortals wait
The coming god, and from their thrones of state
Arising silent, wrappâd in holy fear,
Before the majesty of heaven appear.
Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne,
All, but the godâs imperious queen alone:
Late had she viewâd the silver-footed dame,
And all her passions kindled into flame.
âSay, artful manager of heaven (she cries),
Who now partakes the secrets of the skies?
Thy Juno knows not the decrees of fate,
In vain the partner of imperial state.
What favourite goddess then those cares divides,
Which Jove in prudence from his consort hides?â

To this the thunderer: âSeek not thou to find
The sacred counsels of almighty mind:
Involved in darkness lies the great decree,
Nor can the depths of fate be pierced by thee.
What fits thy knowledge, thou the first shalt know;
The first of gods above, and men below;
But thou, nor they, shall search the thoughts that roll
Deep in the close recesses of my soul.â

Full on the sire the goddess of the skies
Rollâd the large orbs of her majestic eyes,
And thus returnâd:ââAustere Saturnius, say,
From whence this wrath, or who controls thy sway?
Thy boundless will, for me, remains in force,
And all thy counsels take the destined course.
But âtis for Greece I fear: for late was seen,
In close consult, the silver-footed queen.
Jove to his Thetis nothing could deny,
Nor was the signal vain that shook the sky.
What fatal favour has the goddess won,
To grace her fierce, inexorable son?
Perhaps in Grecian blood to drench the plain,
And glut his vengeance with my people slain.â

Then thus the god: âO restless fate of pride,
That strives to learn what heaven resolves to hide;
Vain is the search, presumptuous and abhorrâd,
Anxious to thee, and odious to thy lord.
Let this suffice: the immutable decree
No force can shake: what is, that ought to be.
Goddess, submit; nor dare our will withstand,
But dread the power of this avenging hand:
The united strength of all the gods above
In vain resists the omnipotence of Jove.â


[Illustration: ] VULCAN


The thunderer spoke, nor durst the queen reply;
A reverent horror silenced all the sky.
The feast disturbâd, with sorrow Vulcan saw
His mother menaced, and the gods in awe;
Peace at his heart, and pleasure his design,
Thus interposed the architect divine:
âThe wretched quarrels of the mortal state
Are far unworthy, gods! of your debate:
Let men their days in senseless strife employ,
We, in eternal peace and constant joy.
Thou, goddess-mother, with our sire comply,
Nor break the sacred union of the sky:
Lest, roused to rage, he shake the blessâd abodes,
Launch the red lightning, and dethrone the gods.
If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased;
The gracious power is willing to be pleased.â

Thus Vulcan spoke: and rising with a bound,
The double bowl with sparkling nectar crownâd,[72]
Which held to Juno in a cheerful way,
âGoddess (he cried), be patient and obey.
Dear as you are, if Jove his arm extend,
I can but grieve, unable to defend.
What god so daring in your aid to move,
Or lift his hand against the force of Jove?
Once in your cause I felt his matchless might,
Hurlâd headlong down from the ethereal height;[73]
Tossâd all the day in rapid circles round,
Nor till the sun descended touchâd the ground.
Breathless I fell, in giddy motion lost;
The Sinthians raised me on the Lemnian coast;[74]

He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved,
Which, with a smile, the white-armâd queen received
Then, to the rest he fillâd; and in his turn,
Each to his lips applied the nectarâd urn,
Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies,
And unextinguishâd laughter shakes the skies.

Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong,
In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.[75]
Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round
With voice alternate aid the silver sound.
Meantime the radiant sun to mortal sight
Descending swift, rollâd down the rapid light:
Then to their starry domes the gods depart,
The shining monuments of Vulcanâs art:
Jove on his couch reclined his awful head,
And Juno slumberâd on the golden bed.


[Illustration: ] JUPITER


[Illustration: ] THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER




BOOK II.


ARGUMENT.


THE TRIAL OF THE ARMY, AND CATALOGUE OF THE FORCES.


Jupiter, in pursuance of the request of Thetis, sends a deceitful
vision to Agamemnon, persuading him to lead the army to battle, in
order to make the Greeks sensible of their want of Achilles. The
general, who is deluded with the hopes of taking Troy without his
assistance, but fears the army was discouraged by his absence, and the
late plague, as well as by the length of time, contrives to make trial
of their disposition by a stratagem. He first communicates his design
to the princes in council, that he would propose a return to the
soldiers, and that they should put a stop to them if the proposal was
embraced. Then he assembles the whole host, and upon moving for a
return to Greece, they unanimously agree to it, and run to prepare the
ships. They are detained by the management of Ulysses, who chastises
the insolence of Thersites. The assembly is recalled, several speeches
made on the occasion, and at length the advice of Nestor followed,
which was to make a general muster of the troops, and to divide them
into their several nations, before they proceeded to battle. This gives
occasion to the poet to enumerate all the forces of the Greeks and
Trojans, and in a large catalogue.
    The time employed in this book consists not entirely of one day.
    The scene lies in the Grecian camp, and upon the sea-shore; towards
    the end it removes to Troy.


Now pleasing sleep had sealâd each mortal eye,
Stretchâd in the tents the Grecian leaders lie:
The immortals slumberâd on their thrones above;
All, but the ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.[76]
To honour Thetisâ son he bends his care,
And plunge the Greeks in all the woes of war:
Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight,
And thus commands the vision of the night.

âFly hence, deluding Dream! and light as air,[77]
To Agamemnonâs ample tent repair.
Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train,
Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.
Declare, eâen now âtis given him to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Junoâs suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs oâer yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.â

Swift as the word the vain illusion fled,
Descends, and hovers oâer Atridesâ head;
Clothed in the figure of the Pylian sage,
Renownâd for wisdom, and revered for age:
Around his temples spreads his golden wing,
And thus the flattering dream deceives the king.


[Illustration: ] JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON


âCanst thou, with all a monarchâs cares oppressâd,
O Atreusâ son! canst thou indulge thy rest?[78]
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
Directs in council, and in war presides,
To whom its safety a whole people owes,
To waste long nights in indolent repose.[79]
Monarch, awake! âtis Joveâs command I bear;
Thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care.
In just array draw forth the embattled train,
Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;
Eâen now, O king! âtis given thee to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Junoâs suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs oâer yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.
Awake, but waking this advice approve,
And trust the vision that descends from Jove.â

The phantom said; then vanishâd from his sight,
Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.
A thousand schemes the monarchâs mind employ;
Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy:
Vain as he was, and to the future blind,
Nor saw what Jove and secret fate designâd,
What mighty toils to either host remain,
What scenes of grief, and numbers of the slain!
Eager he rises, and in fancy hears
The voice celestial murmuring in his ears.
First on his limbs a slender vest he drew,
Around him next the regal mantle threw,
The embroiderâd sandals on his feet were tied;
The starry falchion glitterâd at his side;
And last, his arm the massy sceptre loads,
Unstainâd, immortal, and the gift of gods.

Now rosy Morn ascends the court of Jove,
Lifts up her light, and opens day above.
The king despatchâd his heralds with commands
To range the camp and summon all the bands:
The gathering hosts the monarchâs word obey;
While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.
In his black ship the Pylian prince he found;
There calls a senate of the peers around:
The assembly placed, the king of men expressâd
The counsels labouring in his artful breast.

âFriends and confederates! with attentive ear
Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
Late as I slumberâd in the shades of night,
A dream divine appearâd before my sight;
Whose visionary form like Nestor came,
The same in habit, and in mien the same.[80]
The heavenly phantom hoverâd oâer my head,
âAnd, dost thou sleep, O Atreusâ son? (he said)
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
Directs in council, and in war presides;
To whom its safety a whole people owes,
To waste long nights in indolent repose.
Monarch, awake! âtis Joveâs command I bear,
Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
In just array draw forth the embattled train,
And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;
Eâen now, O king! âtis given thee to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Junoâs suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs oâer yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.

This hear observant, and the gods obey!â
The vision spoke, and passâd in air away.
Now, valiant chiefs! since heaven itself alarms,
Unite, and rouse the sons of Greece to arms.
But first, with caution, try what yet they dare,
Worn with nine years of unsuccessful war.
To move the troops to measure back the main,
Be mine; and yours the province to detain.â

He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said,
(Nestor, whom Pylosâ sandy realms obeyâd,)
âPrinces of Greece, your faithful ears incline,
Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine;
Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host,
Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!
Then let us haste, obey the godâs alarms,
And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms.â

Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay
Dissolve the council, and their chief obey:
The sceptred rulers lead; the following host,
Pourâd forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.
As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees
Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees,
Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,
With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms;
Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,
And oâer the vale descends the living cloud.[81]
So, from the tents and ships, a lengthenâd train
Spreads all the beach, and wide oâershades the plain:
Along the region runs a deafening sound;
Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground.
Fame flies before the messenger of Jove,
And shining soars, and claps her wings above.
Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud[82]
The monarchâs will, suspend the listening crowd.
Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear,
And fainter murmurs died upon the ear,
The king of kings his awful figure raised:
High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed;
The golden sceptre, of celestial flame,
By Vulcan formâd, from Jove to Hermes came.
To Pelops he the immortal gift resignâd;
The immortal gift great Pelops left behind,
In Atreusâ hand, which not with Atreus ends,
To rich Thyestes next the prize descends;
And now the mark of Agamemnonâs reign,
Subjects all Argos, and controls the main.[83]

On this bright sceptre now the king reclined,
And artful thus pronounced the speech designâd:
âYe sons of Mars, partake your leaderâs care,
Heroes of Greece, and brothers of the war!
Of partial Jove with justice I complain,
And heavenly oracles believed in vain
A safe return was promised to our toils,
Renownâd, triumphant, and enrichâd with spoils.
Now shameful flight alone can save the host,
Our blood, our treasure, and our glory lost.
So Jove decrees, resistless lord of all!
At whose command whole empires rise or fall:
He shakes the feeble props of human trust,
And towns and armies humbles to the dust.
What shame to Greece a fruitful war to wage,
Oh, lasting shame in every future age!
Once great in arms, the common scorn we grow,
Repulsed and baffled by a feeble foe.
So small their number, that if wars were ceased,
And Greece triumphant held a general feast,
All rankâd by tens, whole decades when they dine
Must want a Trojan slave to pour the wine.[84]
But other forces have our hopes oâerthrown,
And Troy prevails by armies not her own.
Now nine long years of mighty Jove are run,
Since first the labours of this war begun:
Our cordage torn, decayâd our vessels lie,
And scarce insure the wretched power to fly.
Haste, then, for ever leave the Trojan wall!
Our weeping wives, our tender children call:
Love, duty, safety, summon us away,
âTis natureâs voice, and nature we obey.
Our shatterâd barks may yet transport us oâer,
Safe and inglorious, to our native shore.
Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars employ,
And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy.â

His deep design unknown, the hosts approve
Atridesâ speech. The mighty numbers move.
So roll the billows to the Icarian shore,
From east and south when winds begin to roar,
Burst their dark mansions in the clouds, and sweep
The whitening surface of the ruffled deep.
And as on corn when western gusts descend,[85]
Before the blast the lofty harvests bend:
Thus oâer the field the moving host appears,
With nodding plumes and groves of waving spears.
The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feet
Beat the loose sands, and thicken to the fleet;
With long-resounding cries they urge the train
To fit the ships, and launch into the main.
They toil, they sweat, thick clouds of dust arise,
The doubling clamours echo to the skies.
Eâen then the Greeks had left the hostile plain,
And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain;
But Joveâs imperial queen their flight surveyâd,
And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid:

âShall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace!
And leave unpunishâd this perfidious race?
Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse,
In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?
And bravest chiefs, in Helenâs quarrel slain,
Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms,
Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain,
Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main.â

Pallas obeys, and from Olympusâ height
Swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
Ulysses, first in public cares, she found,
For prudent counsel like the gods renownâd:
Oppressâd with generous grief the hero stood,
Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood.
âAnd is it thus, divine Laertesâ son,
Thus fly the Greeks (the martial maid begun),
Thus to their country bear their own disgrace,
And fame eternal leave to Priamâs race?
Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed,
Still unrevenged, a thousand heroes bleed!
Haste, generous Ithacus! prevent the shame,
Recall your armies, and your chiefs reclaim.
Your own resistless eloquence employ,
And to the immortals trust the fall of Troy.â

The voice divine confessâd the warlike maid,
Ulysses heard, nor uninspired obeyâd:
Then meeting first Atrides, from his hand
Received the imperial sceptre of command.
Thus graced, attention and respect to gain,
He runs, he flies through all the Grecian train;
Each prince of name, or chief in arms approved,
He fired with praise, or with persuasion moved.

âWarriors like you, with strength and wisdom blessâd,
By brave examples should confirm the rest.
The monarchâs will not yet revealâd appears;
He tries our courage, but resents our fears.
The unwary Greeks his fury may provoke;
Not thus the king in secret council spoke.
Jove loves our chief, from Jove his honour springs,
Beware! for dreadful is the wrath of kings.â

But if a clamorous vile plebeian rose,
Him with reproof he checkâd or tamed with blows.
âBe still, thou slave, and to thy betters yield;
Unknown alike in council and in field!
Ye gods, what dastards would our host command!
Swept to the war, the lumber of a land.
Be silent, wretch, and think not here allowâd
That worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.
To one sole monarch Jove commits the sway;
His are the laws, and him let all obey.â[86]

With words like these the troops Ulysses ruled,
The loudest silenced, and the fiercest coolâd.
Back to the assembly roll the thronging train,
Desert the ships, and pour upon the plain.
Murmuring they move, as when old ocean roars,
And heaves huge surges to the trembling shores;
The groaning banks are burst with bellowing sound,
The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound.
At length the tumult sinks, the noises cease,
And a still silence lulls the camp to peace.
Thersites only clamourâd in the throng,
Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue:
Awed by no shame, by no respect controllâd,
In scandal busy, in reproaches bold:
With witty malice studious to defame,
Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:â
But chief he gloried with licentious style
To lash the great, and monarchs to revile.
His figure such as might his soul proclaim;
One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame:
His mountain shoulders half his breast oâerspread,
Thin hairs bestrewâd his long misshapen head.
Spleen to mankind his envious heart possessâd,
And much he hated all, but most the best:
Ulysses or Achilles still his theme;
But royal scandal his delight supreme,
Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek,
Vexâd when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.
Sharp was his voice; which in the shrillest tone,
Thus with injurious taunts attackâd the throne.

âAmidst the glories of so bright a reign,
What moves the great Atrides to complain?
âTis thine whateâer the warriorâs breast inflames,
The golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames.
With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow,
Thy tents are crowded and thy chests oâerflow.
Thus at full ease in heaps of riches rollâd,
What grieves the monarch? Is it thirst of gold?
Say, shall we march with our unconquerâd powers
(The Greeks and I) to Ilionâs hostile towers,
And bring the race of royal bastards here,
For Troy to ransom at a price too dear?
But safer plunder thy own host supplies;
Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leaderâs prize?
Or, if thy heart to generous love be led,
Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly bed?
Whateâer our master craves submit we must,
Plagued with his pride, or punishâd for his lust.
Oh women of Achaia; men no more!
Hence let us fly, and let him waste his store
In loves and pleasures on the Phrygian shore.
We may be wanted on some busy day,
When Hector comes: so great Achilles may:
From him he forced the prize we jointly gave,
From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave:
And durst he, as he ought, resent that wrong,
This mighty tyrant were no tyrant long.â

Fierce from his seat at this Ulysses springs,[87]
In generous vengeance of the king of kings.
With indignation sparkling in his eyes,
He views the wretch, and sternly thus replies:

âPeace, factious monster, born to vex the state,
With wrangling talents formâd for foul debate:
Curb that impetuous tongue, nor rashly vain,
And singly mad, asperse the sovereign reign.
Have we not known thee, slave! of all our host,
The man who acts the least, upbraids the most?
Think not the Greeks to shameful flight to bring,
Nor let those lips profane the name of king.
For our return we trust the heavenly powers;
Be that their care; to fight like men be ours.
But grant the host with wealth the general load,
Except detraction, what hast thou bestowâd?
Suppose some hero should his spoils resign,
Art thou that hero, could those spoils be thine?
Gods! let me perish on this hateful shore,
And let these eyes behold my son no more;
If, on thy next offence, this hand forbear
To strip those arms thou ill deservâst to wear,
Expel the council where our princes meet,
And send thee scourged and howling through the fleet.â

He said, and cowering as the dastard bends,
The weighty sceptre on his back descends.[88]
On the round bunch the bloody tumours rise:
The tears spring starting from his haggard eyes;
Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject fears,
From his vile visage wiped the scalding tears;
While to his neighbour each expressâd his thought:

âYe gods! what wonders has Ulysses wrought!
What fruits his conduct and his courage yield!
Great in the council, glorious in the field.
Generous he rises in the crownâs defence,
To curb the factious tongue of insolence,
Such just examples on offenders shown,
Sedition silence, and assert the throne.â

âTwas thus the general voice the hero praised,
Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised:
The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend,
(In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend.
The expecting crowds in still attention hung,
To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke,
His silence thus the prudent hero broke:

âUnhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race
With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
Not such at Argos was their generous vow:
Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now:
Neâer to return, was then the common cry,
Till Troyâs proud structures should in ashes lie.
Behold them weeping for their native shore;
What could their wives or helpless children more?
What heart but melts to leave the tender train,
And, one short month, endure the wintry main?
Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat,
When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat:
Then well may this long stay provoke their tears,
The tedious length of nine revolving years.
Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame;
But vanquishâd! baffled! oh, eternal shame!
Expect the time to Troyâs destruction given.
And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven.
What passâd at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,[89]
And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.
Beside a fountainâs sacred brink we raised
Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed:
âTwas where the plane-tree spread its shades around,
The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground
A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent;
From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he rollâd,
And curlâd around in many a winding fold;
The topmost branch a mother-bird possessâd;
Eight callow infants fillâd the mossy nest;
Herself the ninth; the serpent, as he hung,
Stretchâd his black jaws and crushâd the crying young;
While hovering near, with miserable moan,
The drooping mother wailâd her children gone.
The mother last, as round the nest she flew,
Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew;
Nor long survived: to marble turnâd, he stands
A lasting prodigy on Aulisâ sands.
Such was the will of Jove; and hence we dare
Trust in his omen, and support the war.
For while around we gazed with wondering eyes,
And trembling sought the powers with sacrifice,
Full of his god, the reverend Chalcas cried,[90]
âYe Grecian warriors! lay your fears aside.
This wondrous signal Jove himself displays,
Of long, long labours, but eternal praise.
As many birds as by the snake were slain,
So many years the toils of Greece remain;
But wait the tenth, for Ilionâs fall decreed:â
Thus spoke the prophet, thus the Fates succeed.
Obey, ye Grecians! with submission wait,
Nor let your flight avert the Trojan fate.â
He said: the shores with loud applauses sound,
The hollow ships each deafening shout rebound.
Then Nestor thusââThese vain debates forbear,
Ye talk like children, not like heroes dare.
Where now are all your high resolves at last?
Your leagues concluded, your engagements past?
Vowâd with libations and with victims then,
Now vanishâd like their smoke: the faith of men!
While useless words consume the unactive hours,
No wonder Troy so long resists our powers.
Rise, great Atrides! and with courage sway;
We march to war, if thou direct the way.
But leave the few that dare resist thy laws,
The mean deserters of the Grecian cause,
To grudge the conquests mighty Jove prepares,
And view with envy our successful wars.
On that great day, when first the martial train,
Big with the fate of Ilion, ploughâd the main,
Jove, on the right, a prosperous signal sent,
And thunder rolling shook the firmament.
Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious strife,
Till every soldier grasp a Phrygian wife,
Till Helenâs woes at full revenged appear,
And Troyâs proud matrons render tear for tear.
Before that day, if any Greek invite
His countryâs troops to base, inglorious flight,
Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his sail to fly,
And die the dastard first, who dreads to die.
But now, O monarch! all thy chiefs advise:[91]
Nor what they offer, thou thyself despise.
Among those counsels, let not mine be vain;
In tribes and nations to divide thy train:
His separate troops let every leader call,
Each strengthen each, and all encourage all.
What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band,
Or bravely fights, or ill obeys command,
When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known
And what the cause of Ilion not oâerthrown;
If fate resists, or if our arms are slow,
If gods above prevent, or men below.â

To him the king: âHow much thy years excel
In arts of counsel, and in speaking well!
O would the gods, in love to Greece, decree
But ten such sages as they grant in thee;
Such wisdom soon should Priamâs force destroy,
And soon should fall the haughty towers of Troy!
But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates
In fierce contention and in vain debates:
Now great Achilles from our aid withdraws,
By me provoked; a captive maid the cause:
If eâer as friends we join, the Trojan wall
Must shake, and heavy will the vengeance fall!
But now, ye warriors, take a short repast;
And, well refreshâd, to bloody conflict haste.
His sharpenâd spear let every Grecian wield,
And every Grecian fix his brazen shield,
Let all excite the fiery steeds of war,
And all for combat fit the rattling car.
This day, this dreadful day, let each contend;
No rest, no respite, till the shades descend;
Till darkness, or till death, shall cover all:
Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall;
Till bathed in sweat be every manly breast,
With the huge shield each brawny arm depressâd,
Each aching nerve refuse the lance to throw,
And each spent courser at the chariot blow.
Who dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay,
Who dares to tremble on this signal day;
That wretch, too mean to fall by martial power,
The birds shall mangle, and the dogs devour.â

The monarch spoke; and straight a murmur rose,
Loud as the surges when the tempest blows,
That dashâd on broken rocks tumultuous roar,
And foam and thunder on the stony shore.
Straight to the tents the troops dispersing bend,
The fires are kindled, and the smokes ascend;
With hasty feasts they sacrifice, and pray,
To avert the dangers of the doubtful day.
A steer of five yearsâ age, large limbâd, and fed,[92]
To Joveâs high altars Agamemnon led:
There bade the noblest of the Grecian peers;
And Nestor first, as most advanced in years.
Next came Idomeneus,[93] and Tydeusâ son,[94]
Ajax the less, and Ajax Telamon;[95]
Then wise Ulysses in his rank was placed;
And Menelaus came, unbid, the last.[96]
The chiefs surround the destined beast, and take
The sacred offering of the salted cake:
When thus the king prefers his solemn prayer;
âO thou! whose thunder rends the clouded air,
Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy throne,
Supreme of gods! unbounded, and alone!
Hear! and before the burning sun descends,
Before the night her gloomy veil extends,
Low in the dust be laid yon hostile spires,
Be Priamâs palace sunk in Grecian fires.
In Hectorâs breast be plunged this shining sword,
And slaughterâd heroes groan around their lord!â

Thus prayed the chief: his unavailing prayer
Great Jove refused, and tossâd in empty air:
The God averse, while yet the fumes arose,
Prepared new toils, and doubled woes on woes.
Their prayers performâd the chiefs the rite pursue,
The barley sprinkled, and the victim slew.
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide,
The thighs, selected to the gods, divide.
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lie from every part,
From the cleft wood the crackling flames aspire
While the fat victims feed the sacred fire.
The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dressâd
The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest;
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
Soon as the rage of hunger was suppressâd,
The generous Nestor thus the prince addressâd.

âNow bid thy heralds sound the loud alarms,
And call the squadrons sheathed in brazen arms;
Now seize the occasion, now the troops survey,
And lead to war when heaven directs the way.â

He said; the monarch issued his commands;
Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands;
The chiefs inclose their king; the hosts divide,
In tribes and nations rankâd on either side.
High in the midst the blue-eyed virgin flies;
From rank to rank she darts her ardent eyes;
The dreadful aegis, Joveâs immortal shield,
Blazed on her arm, and lightenâd all the field:
Round the vast orb a hundred serpents rollâd,
Formâd the bright fringe, and seemâd to burn in gold,
With this each Grecianâs manly breast she warms,
Swells their bold hearts, and strings their nervous arms,
No more they sigh, inglorious, to return,
But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

As on some mountain, through the lofty grove,
The crackling flames ascend, and blaze above;
The fires expanding, as the winds arise,
Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies:
So from the polishâd arms, and brazen shields,
A gleamy splendour flashâd along the fields.
Not less their number than the embodied cranes,
Or milk-white swans in Asiusâ watery plains.
That, oâer the windings of Caysterâs springs,[97]
Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings,
Now tower aloft, and course in airy rounds,
Now light with noise; with noise the field resounds.
Thus numerous and confused, extending wide,
The legions crowd Scamanderâs flowery side;[98]
With rushing troops the plains are coverâd oâer,
And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
Along the riverâs level meads they stand,
Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land,
Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play,
The wandering nation of a summerâs day:
That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours,
In gatherâd swarms surround the rural bowers;
From pail to pail with busy murmur run
The gilded legions, glittering in the sun.
So throngâd, so close, the Grecian squadrons stood
In radiant arms, and thirst for Trojan blood.
Each leader now his scatterâd force conjoins
In close array, and forms the deepening lines.
Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swain
Collects his flocks from thousands on the plain.
The king of kings, majestically tall,
Towers oâer his armies, and outshines them all;
Like some proud bull, that round the pastures leads
His subject herds, the monarch of the meads,
Great as the gods, the exalted chief was seen,
His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his mien;[99]
Jove oâer his eyes celestial glories spread,
And dawning conquest played around his head.

Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine,
All-knowing goddesses! immortal nine![100]
Since earthâs wide regions, heavenâs umneasurâd height,
And hellâs abyss, hide nothing from your sight,
(We, wretched mortals! lost in doubts below,
But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,)
O say what heroes, fired by thirst of fame,
Or urged by wrongs, to Troyâs destruction came.
To count them all, demands a thousand tongues,
A throat of brass, and adamantine lungs.
Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by you
The mighty labour dauntless I pursue;
What crowded armies, from what climes they bring,
Their names, their numbers, and their chiefs I sing.

THE CATALOGUE OF THE SHIPS.[101]


[Illustration: ] NEPTUNE


The hardy warriors whom BÅotia bred,
Penelius, Leitus, Prothoenor, led:
With these Arcesilaus and Clonius stand,
Equal in arms, and equal in command.
These head the troops that rocky Aulis yields,
And Eteonâs hills, and Hyrieâs watery fields,
And Schoenos, Scholos, Graea near the main,
And Mycalessiaâs ample piny plain;
Those who in Peteon or Ilesion dwell,
Or Harma where Apolloâs prophet fell;
Heleon and Hyle, which the springs oâerflow;
And Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low;
Or in the meads of Haliartus stray,
Or Thespia sacred to the god of day:
Onchestus, Neptuneâs celebrated groves;
Copae, and Thisbe, famed for silver doves;
For flocks ErythrÃ¦, Glissa for the vine;
Platea green, and Nysa the divine;
And they whom Thebeâs well-built walls inclose,
Where Myde, Eutresis, Corone, rose;
And Arne rich, with purple harvests crownâd;
And Anthedon, BÅotiaâs utmost bound.
Full fifty ships they send, and each conveys
Twice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.[102]

To these succeed Aspledonâs martial train,
Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain.
Two valiant brothers rule the undaunted throng,
Ialmen and Ascalaphus the strong:
Sons of Astyoche, the heavenly fair,
Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war:
(In Actorâs court as she retired to rest,
The strength of Mars the blushing maid compressâd)
Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep,
With equal oars, the hoarse-resounding deep.

The Phocians next in forty barks repair;
Epistrophus and Schedius head the war:
From those rich regions where Cephisus leads
His silver current through the flowery meads;
From Panopea, Chrysa the divine,
Where Anemoriaâs stately turrets shine,
Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood,
And fair Lilaea views the rising flood.
These, ranged in order on the floating tide,
Close, on the left, the bold BÅotiansâ side.

Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on,
Ajax the less, Oileusâ valiant son;
Skillâd to direct the flying dart aright;
Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight.
Him, as their chief, the chosen troops attend,
Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send;
Opus, Calliarus, and Scarpheâs bands;
And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands,
And where Boagrius floats the lowly lands,
Or in fair Tarpheâs sylvan seats reside:
In forty vessels cut the yielding tide.

Euboea next her martial sons prepares,
And sends the brave Abantes to the wars:
Breathing revenge, in arms they take their way
From Chalcisâ walls, and strong Eretria;
The Isteian fields for generous vines renownâd,
The fair Caristos, and the Styrian ground;
Where Dios from her towers oâerlooks the plain,
And high Cerinthus views the neighbouring main.
Down their broad shoulders falls a length of hair;
Their hands dismiss not the long lance in air;
But with protended spears in fighting fields
Pierce the tough corslets and the brazen shields.
Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands,
Which bold Elphenor, fierce in arms, commands.

Full fifty more from Athens stem the main,
Led by Menestheus through the liquid plain.
(Athens the fair, where great Erectheus swayâd,
That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.
Him Pallas placed amidst her wealthy fane,
Adored with sacrifice and oxen slain;
Where, as the years revolve, her altars blaze,
And all the tribes resound the goddessâ praise.)
No chief like thee, Menestheus! Greece could yield,
To marshal armies in the dusty field,
The extended wings of battle to display,
Or close the embodied host in firm array.
Nestor alone, improved by length of days,
For martial conduct bore an equal praise.

With these appear the Salaminian bands,
Whom the gigantic Telamon commands;
In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course,
And with the great Athenians join their force.

Next move to war the generous Argive train,
From high Troezene, and Masetaâs plain,
And fair Ãgina circled by the main:
Whom strong Tyrintheâs lofty walls surround,
And Epidaure with viny harvests crownâd:
And where fair Asinen and Hermoin show
Their cliffs above, and ample bay below.
These by the brave Euryalus were led,
Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed;
But chief Tydides bore the sovereign sway:
In fourscore barks they plough the watery way.

The proud Mycene arms her martial powers,
Cleone, Corinth, with imperial towers,[103]
Fair Araethyrea, Orniaâs fruitful plain,
And Ãgion, and Adrastusâ ancient reign;
And those who dwell along the sandy shore,
And where Pellene yields her fleecy store,
Where Helice and Hyperesia lie,
And Gonoessaâs spires salute the sky.
Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band,
A hundred vessels in long order stand,
And crowded nations wait his dread command.
High on the deck the king of men appears,
And his refulgent arms in triumph wears;
Proud of his host, unrivallâd in his reign,
In silent pomp he moves along the main.

His brother follows, and to vengeance warms
The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms:
Phares and Brysiaâs valiant troops, and those
Whom Lacedaemonâs lofty hills inclose;
Or Messeâs towers for silver doves renownâd,
Amyclae, Laas, Augiaâs happy ground,
And those whom OEtylosâ low walls contain,
And Helos, on the margin of the main.
These, oâer the bending ocean, Helenâs cause,
In sixty ships with Menelaus draws:
Eager and loud from man to man he flies,
Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes;
While vainly fond, in fancy oft he hears
The fair oneâs grief, and sees her falling tears.

In ninety sail, from Pylosâ sandy coast,
Nestor the sage conducts his chosen host:
From Amphigeniaâs ever-fruitful land,
Where Ãpy high, and little Pteleon stand;
Where beauteous Arene her structures shows,
And Thryonâs walls Alpheusâ streams inclose:
And Dorion, famed for Thamyrisâ disgrace,
Superior once of all the tuneful race,
Till, vain of mortalsâ empty praise, he strove
To match the seed of cloud-compelling Jove!
Too daring bard! whose unsuccessful pride
The immortal Muses in their art defied.
The avenging Muses of the light of day
Deprived his eyes, and snatchâd his voice away;
No more his heavenly voice was heard to sing,
His hand no more awaked the silver string.

Where under high Cyllene, crownâd with wood,
The shaded tomb of old Ãpytus stood;
From Ripe, Stratie, Tegeaâs bordering towns,
The Phenean fields, and Orchomenian downs,
Where the fat herds in plenteous pasture rove;
And Stymphelus with her surrounding grove;
Parrhasia, on her snowy cliffs reclined,
And high Enispe shook by wintry wind,
And fair Mantineaâs ever-pleasing site;
In sixty sail the Arcadian bands unite.
Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head,
(Ancaeusâ son) the mighty squadron led.
Their ships, supplied by Agamemnonâs care,
Through roaring seas the wondering warriors bear;
The first to battle on the appointed plain,
But new to all the dangers of the main.

Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join;
Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine,
And bounded there, where oâer the valleys rose
The Olenian rock; and where Alisium flows;
Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came:
The strength and glory of the Epean name.
In separate squadrons these their train divide,
Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.
One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one;
(Eurytusâ this, and that Teatusâ son;)
Diores sprung from Amarynceusâ line;
And great Polyxenus, of force divine.

But those who view fair Elis oâer the seas
From the blest islands of the Echinades,
In forty vessels under Meges move,
Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove:
To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled,
And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.

Ulysses followâd through the watery road,
A chief, in wisdom equal to a god.
With those whom Cephaleniaâs line inclosed,
Or till their fields along the coast opposed;
Or where fair Ithaca oâerlooks the floods,
Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods,
Where Ãgilipaâs rugged sides are seen,
Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores,
Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores.

Thoas came next, Andraemonâs valiant son,
From Pleuronâs walls, and chalky Calydon,
And rough Pylene, and the Olenian steep,
And Chalcis, beaten by the rolling deep.
He led the warriors from the Ãtolian shore,
For now the sons of OEneus were no more!
The glories of the mighty race were fled!
OEneus himself, and Meleager dead!
To Thoasâ care now trust the martial train,
His forty vessels follow through the main.

Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands,
Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortynaâs bands;
And those who dwell where Rhytionâs domes arise,
Or white Lycastus glitters to the skies,
Or where by Phaestus silver Jardan runs;
Creteâs hundred cities pour forth all her sons.
These marchâd, Idomeneus, beneath thy care,
And Merion, dreadful as the god of war.

Tlepolemus, the son of Hercules,
Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas,
From Rhodes, with everlasting sunshine bright,
Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.
His captive mother fierce Alcides bore
From Ephyrâs walls and Selleâs winding shore,
Where mighty towns in ruins spread the plain,
And saw their blooming warriors early slain.
The hero, when to manly years he grew,
Alcidesâ uncle, old Licymnius, slew;
For this, constrainâd to quit his native place,
And shun the vengeance of the Herculean race,
A fleet he built, and with a numerous train
Of willing exiles wanderâd oâer the main;
Where, many seas and many sufferings past,
On happy Rhodes the chief arrived at last:
There in three tribes divides his native band,
And rules them peaceful in a foreign land;
Increased and prosperâd in their new abodes
By mighty Jove, the sire of men and gods;
With joy they saw the growing empire rise,
And showers of wealth descending from the skies.

Three ships with Nireus sought the Trojan shore,
Nireus, whom Aglae to Charopus bore,
Nireus, in faultless shape and blooming grace,
The loveliest youth of all the Grecian race;[104]
Pelides only matchâd his early charms;
But few his troops, and small his strength in arms.

Next thirty galleys cleave the liquid plain,
Of those Calydnaeâs sea-girt isles contain;
With them the youth of Nisyrus repair,
Casus the strong, and Crapathus the fair;
Cos, where Eurypylus possessâd the sway,
Till great Alcides made the realms obey:
These Antiphus and bold Phidippus bring,
Sprung from the god by Thessalus the king.

Now, Muse, recount Pelasgic Argosâ powers,
From Alos, Alope, and Trechinâs towers:
From Phthiaâs spacious vales; and Hella, blessâd
With female beauty far beyond the rest.
Full fifty ships beneath Achillesâ care,
The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear;
Thessalians all, though various in their name;
The same their nation, and their chief the same.
But now inglorious, stretchâd along the shore,
They hear the brazen voice of war no more;
No more the foe they face in dire array:
Close in his fleet the angry leader lay;
Since fair BriseÃ¯s from his arms was torn,
The noblest spoil from sackâd Lyrnessus borne,
Then, when the chief the Theban walls oâerthrew,
And the bold sons of great Evenus slew.
There mournâd Achilles, plunged in depth of care,
But soon to rise in slaughter, blood, and war.

To these the youth of Phylace succeed,
Itona, famous for her fleecy breed,
And grassy Pteleon deckâd with cheerful greens,
The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes.
Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crownâd,
And Antronâs watery dens, and cavernâd ground.
These ownâd, as chief, Protesilas the brave,
Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave:
The first who boldly touchâd the Trojan shore,
And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore;
There lies, far distant from his native plain;
Unfinishâd his proud palaces remain,
And his sad consort beats her breast in vain.
His troops in forty ships Podarces led,
Iphiclusâ son, and brother to the dead;
Nor he unworthy to command the host;
Yet still they mournâd their ancient leader lost.

The men who Glaphyraâs fair soil partake,
Where hills incircle Boebeâs lowly lake,
Where Phaere hears the neighbouring waters fall,
Or proud Iolcus lifts her airy wall,
In ten black ships embarkâd for Ilionâs shore,
With bold Eumelus, whom Alceste bore:
All Peliasâ race Alceste far outshined,
The grace and glory of the beauteous kind,

The troops Methone or Thaumacia yields,
Olizonâs rocks, or Meliboeaâs fields,
With Philoctetes sailâd whose matchless art
From the tough bow directs the featherâd dart.
Seven were his ships; each vessel fifty row,
Skillâd in his science of the dart and bow.
But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground,
A poisonous hydra gave the burning wound;
There groanâd the chief in agonizing pain,
Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain.
His forces Medon led from Lemnosâ shore,
Oileusâ son, whom beauteous Rhena bore.

The Åchalian race, in those high towers containâd
Where once Eurytus in proud triumph reignâd,
Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears,
Or where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears,
In thirty sail the sparkling waves divide,
Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.
To these his skill their parent-god imparts,
Divine professors of the healing arts.

The bold Ormenian and Asterian bands
In forty barks Eurypylus commands.
Where Titan hides his hoary head in snow,
And where Hyperiaâs silver fountains flow.
Thy troops, Argissa, Polypoetes leads,
And Eleon, shelterâd by Olympusâ shades,
Gyrtoneâs warriors; and where Orthe lies,
And Oloossonâs chalky cliffs arise.
Sprung from Pirithous of immortal race,
The fruit of fair Hippodameâs embrace,
(That day, when hurlâd from Pelionâs cloudy head,
To distant dens the shaggy Centaurs fled)
With Polypoetes joinâd in equal sway
Leonteus leads, and forty ships obey.

In twenty sail the bold Perrhaebians came
From Cyphus, Guneus was their leaderâs name.
With these the Enians joinâd, and those who freeze
Where cold Dodona lifts her holy trees;
Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides,
And into Peneus rolls his easy tides;
Yet oâer the silvery surface pure they flow,
The sacred stream unmixâd with streams below,
Sacred and awful! from the dark abodes
Styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods!

Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood,
(Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredonâs blood;)
Who dwell where Pelion, crownâd with piny boughs,
Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows;
Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus strayâd:
(The region stretchâd beneath his mighty shade:)
In forty sable barks they stemmâd the main;
Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian train.

Say next, O Muse! of all Achaia breeds,
Who bravest fought, or reinâd the noblest steeds?
Eumelusâ mares were foremost in the chase,
As eagles fleet, and of Pheretian race;
Bred where Pieriaâs fruitful fountains flow,
And trainâd by him who bears the silver bow.
Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a flame,
Their height, their colour, and their age the same;
Oâer fields of death they whirl the rapid car,
And break the ranks, and thunder through the war.
Ajax in arms the first renown acquired,
While stern Achilles in his wrath retired:
(His was the strength that mortal might exceeds,
And his the unrivallâd race of heavenly steeds:)
But Thetisâ son now shines in arms no more;
His troops, neglected on the sandy shore.
In empty air their sportive javelins throw,
Or whirl the disk, or bend an idle bow:
Unstainâd with blood his coverâd chariots stand;
The immortal coursers graze along the strand;
But the brave chiefs the inglorious life deplored,
And, wandering oâer the camp, required their lord.

Now, like a deluge, covering all around,
The shining armies sweep along the ground;
Swift as a flood of fire, when storms arise,
Floats the wild field, and blazes to the skies.
Earth groanâd beneath them; as when angry Jove
Hurls down the forky lightning from above,
On Arime when he the thunder throws,
And fires Typhoeus with redoubled blows,
Where Typhon, pressâd beneath the burning load,
Still feels the fury of the avenging god.

But various Iris, Joveâs commands to bear,
Speeds on the wings of winds through liquid air;
In Priamâs porch the Trojan chiefs she found,
The old consulting, and the youths around.
Politesâ shape, the monarchâs son, she chose,
Who from Ãsetesâ tomb observed the foes,[105]
High on the mound; from whence in prospect lay
The fields, the tents, the navy, and the bay.
In this dissembled form, she hastes to bring
The unwelcome message to the Phrygian king.

âCease to consult, the time for action calls;
War, horrid war, approaches to your walls!
Assembled armies oft have I beheld;
But neâer till now such numbers charged a field:
Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand,
The moving squadrons blacken all the strand.
Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ,
Assemble all the united bands of Troy;
In just array let every leader call
The foreign troops: this day demands them all!â

The voice divine the mighty chief alarms;
The council breaks, the warriors rush to arms.
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train,
Nations on nations fill the dusky plain,
Men, steeds, and chariots, shake the trembling ground:
The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.

Amidst the plain, in sight of Ilion, stands
A rising mount, the work of human hands;
(This for Myrinneâs tomb the immortals know,
Though callâd Bateia in the world below;)
Beneath their chiefs in martial order here,
The auxiliar troops and Trojan hosts appear.

The godlike Hector, high above the rest,
Shakes his huge spear, and nods his plumy crest:
In throngs around his native bands repair,
And groves of lances glitter in the air.

Divine Ãneas brings the Dardan race,
Anchisesâ son, by Venusâ stolen embrace,
Born in the shades of Idaâs secret grove;
(A mortal mixing with the queen of love;)
Archilochus and Acamas divide
The warriorâs toils, and combat by his side.

Who fair Zeleiaâs wealthy valleys till,[106]
Fast by the foot of Idaâs sacred hill,
Or drink, Ãsepus, of thy sable flood,
Were led by Pandarus, of royal blood;
To whom his art Apollo deignâd to show,
Graced with the presents of his shafts and bow.

From rich Apaesus and Adrestiaâs towers,
High Tereeâs summits, and Pityeaâs bowers;
From these the congregated troops obey
Young Amphius and Adrastusâ equal sway;
Old Meropsâ sons; whom, skillâd in fates to come,
The sire forewarnâd, and prophesied their doom:
Fate urged them on! the sire forewarnâd in vain,
They rushâd to war, and perishâd on the plain.

From Practiusâ stream, Percoteâs pasture lands,
And Sestos and Abydosâ neighbouring strands,
From great Arisbaâs walls and Selleâs coast,
Asius Hyrtacides conducts his host:
High on his car he shakes the flowing reins,
His fiery coursers thunder oâer the plains.

The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renownâd,
March from Larissaâs ever-fertile ground:
In equal arms their brother leaders shine,
Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the divine.

Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts,
In dread array, from Thraciaâs wintry coasts;
Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars,
And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores.

With great Euphemus the Ciconians move,
Sprung from Troezenian Ceus, loved by Jove.

Pyraechmes the Paeonian troops attend,
Skillâd in the fight their crooked bows to bend;
From Axiusâ ample bed he leads them on,
Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,
Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills,
And wide around the floating region fills.

The Paphlagonians PylÃ¦menes rules,
Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules,
Where Erythinusâ rising cliffs are seen,
Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green,
And where Ãgialus and Cromna lie,
And lofty Sesamus invades the sky,
And where Parthenius, rollâd through banks of flowers,
Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers.

Here marchâd in arms the Halizonian band,
Whom Odius and Epistrophus command,
From those far regions where the sun refines
The ripening silver in Alybean mines.

There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train,
And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain;
For stern Achilles loppâd his sacred head,
Rollâd down Scamander with the vulgar dead.

Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite
The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight.

Of those who round Maeoniaâs realms reside,
Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide,
Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake,
Born on the banks of Gygesâ silent lake.
There, from the fields where wild Maeander flows,
High Mycale, and Latmosâ shady brows,
And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs,
With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.[107]
Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train,
Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,
Who, trickâd with gold, and glittering on his car,
Rode like a woman to the field of war.
Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain,
The river swept him to the briny main:
There whelmâd with waves the gaudy warrior lies
The valiant victor seized the golden prize.

The forces last in fair array succeed,
Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead
The warlike bands that distant Lycia yields,
Where gulfy Xanthus foams along the fields.




BOOK III.


ARGUMENT.


THE DUEL OF MENELAUS AND PARIS.


The armies being ready to engage, a single combat is agreed upon
between Menelaus and Paris (by the intervention of Hector) for the
determination of the war. Iris is sent to call Helen to behold the
fight. She leads her to the walls of Troy, where Priam sat with his
counsellers observing the Grecian leaders on the plain below, to whom
Helen gives an account of the chief of them. The kings on either part
take the solemn oath for the conditions of the combat. The duel ensues;
wherein Paris being overcome, he is snatched away in a cloud by Venus,
and transported to his apartment. She then calls Helen from the walls,
and brings the lovers together. Agamemnon, on the part of the Grecians,
demands the restoration of Helen, and the performance of the articles.
    The three-and-twentieth day still continues throughout this book.
    The scene is sometimes in the fields before Troy, and sometimes in
    Troy itself.


Thus by their leadersâ care each martial band
Moves into ranks, and stretches oâer the land.
With shouts the Trojans, rushing from afar,
Proclaim their motions, and provoke the war.
So when inclement winters vex the plain
With piercing frosts, or thick-descending rain,
To warmer seas the cranes embodied fly,[108]
With noise, and order, through the midway sky;
To pigmy nations wounds and death they bring,
And all the war descends upon the wing,
But silent, breathing rage, resolved and skillâd[109]
By mutual aids to fix a doubtful field,
Swift march the Greeks: the rapid dust around
Darkening arises from the labourâd ground.
Thus from his flaggy wings when Notus sheds
A night of vapours round the mountain heads,
Swift-gliding mists the dusky fields invade,
To thieves more grateful than the midnight shade;
While scarce the swains their feeding flocks survey,
Lost and confused amidst the thickenâd day:
So wrappâd in gathering dust, the Grecian train,
A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the plain.

Now front to front the hostile armies stand,
Eager of fight, and only wait command;
When, to the van, before the sons of fame
Whom Troy sent forth, the beauteous Paris came:
In form a god! the pantherâs speckled hide
Flowâd oâer his armour with an easy pride:
His bended bow across his shoulders flung,
His sword beside him negligently hung;
Two pointed spears he shook with gallant grace,
And dared the bravest of the Grecian race.

As thus, with glorious air and proud disdain,
He boldly stalkâd, the foremost on the plain,
Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies,
With heart elated, and with joyful eyes:
So joys a lion, if the branching deer,
Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear;
Eager he seizes and devours the slain,
Pressâd by bold youths and baying dogs in vain.
Thus fond of vengeance, with a furious bound,
In clanging arms he leaps upon the ground
From his high chariot: him, approaching near,
The beauteous champion views with marks of fear,
Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind,
And shuns the fate he well deserved to find.
As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees[110]
Shot forth to view, a scaly serpent sees,
Trembling and pale, he starts with wild affright
And all confused precipitates his flight:
So from the king the shining warrior flies,
And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.

As godlike Hector sees the prince retreat,
He thus upbraids him with a generous heat:
âUnhappy Paris![111] but to women brave!
So fairly formâd, and only to deceive!
Oh, hadst thou died when first thou sawâst the light,
Or died at least before thy nuptial rite!
A better fate than vainly thus to boast,
And fly, the scandal of thy Trojan host.
Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see
Their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
Thy figure promised with a martial air,
But ill thy soul supplies a form so fair.
In former days, in all thy gallant pride,
When thy tall ships triumphant stemmâd the tide,
When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow,
And crowds stood wondering at the passing show,
Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien,
You met the approaches of the Spartan queen,
Thus from her realm conveyâd the beauteous prize,
And both her warlike lords outshined in Helenâs eyes?
This deed, thy foesâ delight, thy own disgrace,
Thy fatherâs grief, and ruin of thy race;
This deed recalls thee to the profferâd fight;
Or hast thou injured whom thou darâst not right?
Soon to thy cost the field would make thee know
Thou keepâst the consort of a braver foe.
Thy graceful form instilling soft desire,
Thy curling tresses, and thy silver lyre,
Beauty and youth; in vain to these you trust,
When youth and beauty shall be laid in dust:
Troy yet may wake, and one avenging blow
Crush the dire author of his countryâs woe.â

His silence here, with blushes, Paris breaks:
ââTis just, my brother, what your anger speaks:
But who like thee can boast a soul sedate,
So firmly proof to all the shocks of fate?
Thy force, like steel, a temperâd hardness shows,
Still edged to wound, and still untired with blows,
Like steel, uplifted by some strenuous swain,
With falling woods to strew the wasted plain.
Thy gifts I praise; nor thou despise the charms
With which a lover golden Venus arms;
Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show,
No wish can gain them, but the gods bestow.
Yet, wouldâst thou have the profferâd combat stand,
The Greeks and Trojans seat on either hand;
Then let a midway space our hosts divide,
And, on that stage of war, the cause be tried:
By Paris there the Spartan king be fought,
For beauteous Helen and the wealth she brought;
And who his rival can in arms subdue,
His be the fair, and his the treasure too.
Thus with a lasting league your toils may cease,
And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace;
Thus may the Greeks review their native shore,
Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more.â

He said. The challenge Hector heard with joy,
Then with his spear restrainâd the youth of Troy,
Held by the midst, athwart; and near the foe
Advanced with steps majestically slow:
While round his dauntless head the Grecians pour
Their stones and arrows in a mingled shower.

Then thus the monarch, great Atrides, cried:
âForbear, ye warriors! lay the darts aside:
A parley Hector asks, a message bears;
We know him by the various plume he wears.â
Awed by his high command the Greeks attend,
The tumult silence, and the fight suspend.

While from the centre Hector rolls his eyes
On either host, and thus to both applies:
âHear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
What Paris, author of the war, demands.
Your shining swords within the sheath restrain,
And pitch your lances in the yielding plain.
Here in the midst, in either armyâs sight,
He dares the Spartan king to single fight;
And wills that Helen and the ravishâd spoil,
That caused the contest, shall reward the toil.
Let these the brave triumphant victor grace,
And different nations part in leagues of peace.â

He spoke: in still suspense on either side
Each army stood: the Spartan chief replied:

âMe too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal right
A world engages in the toils of fight.
To me the labour of the field resign;
Me Paris injured; all the war be mine.
Fall he that must, beneath his rivalâs arms;
And live the rest, secure of future harms.
Two lambs, devoted by your countryâs rite,
To earth a sable, to the sun a white,
Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bring
Select to Jove, the inviolable king.
Let reverend Priam in the truce engage,
And add the sanction of considerate age;
His sons are faithless, headlong in debate,
And youth itself an empty wavering state;
Cool age advances, venerably wise,
Turns on all hands its deep-discerning eyes;
Sees what befell, and what may yet befall,
Concludes from both, and best provides for all.

The nations hear with rising hopes possessâd,
And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.
Within the lines they drew their steeds around,
And from their chariots issued on the ground;
Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore,
Laid their bright arms along the sable shore.
On either side the meeting hosts are seen
With lances fixâd, and close the space between.
Two heralds now, despatchâd to Troy, invite
The Phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite.

Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring
The lamb for Jove, the inviolable king.

Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skies
The various goddess of the rainbow flies:
(Like fair Laodice in form and face,
The loveliest nymph of Priamâs royal race:)
Her in the palace, at her loom she found;
The golden web her own sad story crownâd,
The Trojan wars she weaved (herself the prize)
And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes.
To whom the goddess of the painted bow:
âApproach, and view the wondrous scene below![112]
Each hardy Greek, and valiant Trojan knight,
So dreadful late, and furious for the fight,
Now rest their spears, or lean upon their shields;
Ceased is the war, and silent all the fields.
Paris alone and Spartaâs king advance,
In single fight to toss the beamy lance;
Each met in arms, the fate of combat tries,
Thy love the motive, and thy charms the prize.â

This said, the many-coloured maid inspires
Her husbandâs love, and wakes her former fires;
Her country, parents, all that once were dear,
Rush to her thought, and force a tender tear,
Oâer her fair face a snowy veil she threw,
And, softly sighing, from the loom withdrew.
Her handmaids, Clymene and Ãthra, wait
Her silent footsteps to the Scaean gate.

There sat the seniors of the Trojan race:
(Old Priamâs chiefs, and most in Priamâs grace,)
The king the first; Thymoetes at his side;
Lampus and Clytius, long in council tried;
Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the strong;
And next, the wisest of the reverend throng,
Antenor grave, and sage Ucalegon,
Leanâd on the walls and baskâd before the sun:
Chiefs, who no more in bloody fights engage,
But wise through time, and narrative with age,
In summer days, like grasshoppers rejoice,
A bloodless race, that send a feeble voice.
These, when the Spartan queen approachâd the tower,
In secret ownâd resistless beautyâs power:
They cried, âNo wonder[113] such celestial charms
For nine long years have set the world in arms;
What winning graces! what majestic mien!
She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen!
Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fatal face,
And from destruction save the Trojan race.â

The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried,
âApproach, my child, and grace thy fatherâs side.
See on the plain thy Grecian spouse appears,
The friends and kindred of thy former years.
No crime of thine our present sufferings draws,
Not thou, but Heavenâs disposing will, the cause
The gods these armies and this force employ,
The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy.
But lift thy eyes, and say, what Greek is he
(Far as from hence these aged orbs can see)
Around whose brow such martial graces shine,
So tall, so awful, and almost divine!
Though some of larger stature tread the green,
None match his grandeur and exalted mien:
He seems a monarch, and his countryâs pride.â
Thus ceased the king, and thus the fair replied:

âBefore thy presence, father, I appear,
With conscious shame and reverential fear.
Ah! had I died, ere to these walls I fled,
False to my country, and my nuptial bed;
My brothers, friends, and daughter left behind,
False to them all, to Paris only kind!
For this I mourn, till grief or dire disease
Shall waste the form whose fault it was to please!
The king of kings, Atrides, you survey,
Great in the war, and great in arts of sway:
My brother once, before my days of shame!
And oh! that still he bore a brotherâs name!â

With wonder Priam viewâd the godlike man,
Extollâd the happy prince, and thus began:
âO blessâd Atrides! born to prosperous fate,
Successful monarch of a mighty state!
How vast thy empire! Of your matchless train
What numbers lost, what numbers yet remain!
In Phrygia once were gallant armies known,
In ancient time, when Otreus fillâd the throne,
When godlike Mygdon led their troops of horse,
And I, to join them, raised the Trojan force:
Against the manlike Amazons we stood,[114]
And Sangarâs stream ran purple with their blood.
But far inferior those, in martial grace,
And strength of numbers, to this Grecian race.â

This said, once more he viewâd the warrior train;
âWhatâs he, whose arms lie scatterâd on the plain?
Broad is his breast, his shoulders larger spread,
Though great Atrides overtops his head.
Nor yet appear his care and conduct small;
From rank to rank he moves, and orders all.
The stately ram thus measures oâer the ground,
And, master of the flock, surveys them round.â

Then Helen thus: âWhom your discerning eyes
Have singled out, is Ithacus the wise;
A barren island boasts his glorious birth;
His fame for wisdom fills the spacious earth.â

Antenor took the word, and thus began:[115]
âMyself, O king! have seen that wondrous man
When, trusting Jove and hospitable laws,
To Troy he came, to plead the Grecian cause;
(Great Menelaus urged the same request;)
My house was honourâd with each royal guest:
I knew their persons, and admired their parts,
Both brave in arms, and both approved in arts.
Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view;
Ulysses seated, greater reverence drew.
When Atreusâ son harangued the listening train,
Just was his sense, and his expression plain,
His words succinct, yet full, without a fault;
He spoke no more than just the thing he ought.
But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,[116]
His modest eyes he fixâd upon the ground;
As one unskillâd or dumb, he seemâd to stand,
Nor raised his head, nor stretchâd his sceptred hand;
But, when he speaks, what elocution flows!
Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,[117]
The copious accents fall, with easy art;
Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!
Wondering we hear, and fixâd in deep surprise,
Our ears refute the censure of our eyes.â

The king then askâd (as yet the camp he viewâd)
âWhat chief is that, with giant strength endued,
Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest,
And lofty stature, far exceed the rest?
âAjax the great, (the beauteous queen replied,)
Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride.
See! bold Idomeneus superior towers
Amid yon circle of his Cretan powers,
Great as a god! I saw him once before,
With Menelaus on the Spartan shore.
The rest I know, and could in order name;
All valiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame.
Yet two are wanting of the numerous train,
Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain:
Castor and Pollux, first in martial force,
One bold on foot, and one renownâd for horse.
My brothers these; the same our native shore,
One house containâd us, as one mother bore.
Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease,
For distant Troy refused to sail the seas;
Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws,
Ashamed to combat in their sisterâs cause.â

So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothersâ doom;[118]
Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb;
Adornâd with honours in their native shore,
Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more.

Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town,
Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.
Idaeusâ arms the golden goblets pressâd,[119]
Who thus the venerable king addressâd:
âArise, O father of the Trojan state!
The nations call, thy joyful people wait
To seal the truce, and end the dire debate.
Paris, thy son, and Spartaâs king advance,
In measured lists to toss the weighty lance;
And who his rival shall in arms subdue,
His be the dame, and his the treasure too.
Thus with a lasting league our toils may cease,
And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace:
So shall the Greeks review their native shore,
Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more.â

With grief he heard, and bade the chiefs prepare
To join his milk-white coursers to the car;
He mounts the seat, Antenor at his side;
The gentle steeds through Scaeaâs gates they guide:[120]
Next from the car descending on the plain,
Amid the Grecian host and Trojan train,
Slow they proceed: the sage Ulysses then
Arose, and with him rose the king of men.
On either side a sacred herald stands,
The wine they mix, and on each monarchâs hands
Pour the full urn; then draws the Grecian lord
His cutlass sheathed beside his ponderous sword;
From the signâd victims crops the curling hair;[121]
The heralds part it, and the princes share;
Then loudly thus before the attentive bands
He calls the gods, and spreads his lifted hands:

âO first and greatest power! whom all obey,
Who high on Idaâs holy mountain sway,
Eternal Jove! and you bright orb that roll
From east to west, and view from pole to pole!
Thou mother Earth! and all ye living floods!
Infernal furies, and Tartarean gods,
Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
Hear, and be witness. If, by Paris slain,
Great Menelaus press the fatal plain;
The dame and treasures let the Trojan keep,
And Greece returning plough the watery deep.
If by my brotherâs lance the Trojan bleed,
Be his the wealth and beauteous dame decreed:
The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
And every age record the signal day.
This if the Phrygians shall refuse to yield,
Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the field.â

With that the chief the tender victims slew,
And in the dust their bleeding bodies threw;
The vital spirit issued at the wound,
And left the members quivering on the ground.
From the same urn they drink the mingled wine,
And add libations to the powers divine.
While thus their prayers united mount the sky,
âHear, mighty Jove! and hear, ye gods on high!
And may their blood, who first the league confound,
Shed like this wine, disdain the thirsty ground;
May all their consorts serve promiscuous lust,
And all their lust be scatterâd as the dust!â
Thus either host their imprecations joinâd,
Which Jove refused, and mingled with the wind.

The rites now finishâd, reverend Priam rose,
And thus expressâd a heart oâercharged with woes:
âYe Greeks and Trojans, let the chiefs engage,
But spare the weakness of my feeble age:
In yonder walls that object let me shun,
Nor view the danger of so dear a son.
Whose arms shall conquer and what prince shall fall,
Heaven only knows; for heaven disposes all.â

This said, the hoary king no longer stayâd,
But on his car the slaughterâd victims laid:
Then seized the reins his gentle steeds to guide,
And drove to Troy, Antenor at his side.

Bold Hector and Ulysses now dispose
The lists of combat, and the ground inclose:
Next to decide, by sacred lots prepare,
Who first shall launch his pointed spear in air.
The people pray with elevated hands,
And words like these are heard through all the bands:
âImmortal Jove, high Heavenâs superior lord,
On lofty Idaâs holy mount adored!
Whoeâer involved us in this dire debate,
O give that author of the war to fate
And shades eternal! let division cease,
And joyful nations join in leagues of peace.â

With eyes averted Hector hastes to turn
The lots of fight and shakes the brazen urn.
Then, Paris, thine leapâd forth; by fatal chance
Ordainâd the first to whirl the weighty lance.
Both armies sat the combat to survey.
Beside each chief his azure armour lay,
And round the lists the generous coursers neigh.
The beauteous warrior now arrays for fight,
In gilded arms magnificently bright:
The purple cuishes clasp his thighs around,
With flowers adornâd, with silver buckles bound:
Lycaonâs corslet his fair body dressâd,
Braced in and fitted to his softer breast;
A radiant baldric, oâer his shoulder tied,
Sustainâd the sword that glitterâd at his side:
His youthful face a polishâd helm oâerspread;
The waving horse-hair nodded on his head:
His figured shield, a shining orb, he takes,
And in his hand a pointed javelin shakes.
With equal speed and fired by equal charms,
The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms.

Now round the lists the admiring armies stand,
With javelins fixâd, the Greek and Trojan band.
Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance,
All pale with rage, and shake the threatening lance.
The Trojan first his shining javelin threw;
Full on Atridesâ ringing shield it flew,
Nor pierced the brazen orb, but with a bound[122]
Leapâd from the buckler, blunted, on the ground.
Atrides then his massy lance prepares,
In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers:

âGive me, great Jove! to punish lawless lust,
And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust:
Destroy the aggressor, aid my righteous cause,
Avenge the breach of hospitable laws!
Let this example future times reclaim,
And guard from wrong fair friendshipâs holy name,â
He said, and poised in air the javelin sent,
Through Parisâ shield the forceful weapon went,
His corslet pierces, and his garment rends,
And glancing downward, near his flank descends.
The wary Trojan, bending from the blow,
Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe:
But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook
Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook;
The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand,
Broke short: the fragments glitterâd on the sand.
The raging warrior to the spacious skies
Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes:
âThen is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
And is it thus the gods assist the just?
When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies;
The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies.â
Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew
(Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew;
Struggling he followed, while the embroiderâd thong
That tied his helmet, draggâd the chief along.
Then had his ruin crownâd Atridesâ joy,
But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy:
Unseen she came, and burst the golden band;
And left an empty helmet in his hand.
The casque, enraged, amidst the Greeks he threw;
The Greeks with smiles the polishâd trophy view.
Then, as once more he lifts the deadly dart,
In thirst of vengeance, at his rivalâs heart;
The queen of love her favourâd champion shrouds
(For gods can all things) in a veil of clouds.
Raised from the field the panting youth she led,
And gently laid him on the bridal bed,
With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews,
And all the dome perfumes with heavenly dews.
Meantime the brightest of the female kind,
The matchless Helen, oâer the walls reclined;
To her, beset with Trojan beauties, came,
In borrowâd form, the laughter-loving dame.
(She seemâd an ancient maid, well-skillâd to cull
The snowy fleece, and wind the twisted wool.)
The goddess softly shook her silken vest,
That shed perfumes, and whispering thus addressâd:


[Illustration: ] VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF
PARIS


âHaste, happy nymph! for thee thy Paris calls,
Safe from the fight, in yonder lofty walls,
Fair as a god; with odours round him spread,
He lies, and waits thee on the well-known bed;
Not like a warrior parted from the foe,
But some gay dancer in the public show.â

She spoke, and Helenâs secret soul was moved;
She scornâd the champion, but the man she loved.
Fair Venusâ neck, her eyes that sparkled fire,
And breast, revealâd the queen of soft desire.[123]
Struck with her presence, straight the lively red
Forsook her cheek; and trembling, thus she said:
âThen is it still thy pleasure to deceive?
And womanâs frailty always to believe!
Say, to new nations must I cross the main,
Or carry wars to some soft Asian plain?
For whom must Helen break her second vow?
What other Paris is thy darling now?
Left to Atrides, (victor in the strife,)
An odious conquest and a captive wife,
Hence let me sail; and if thy Paris bear
My absence ill, let Venus ease his care.
A handmaid goddess at his side to wait,
Renounce the glories of thy heavenly state,
Be fixâd for ever to the Trojan shore,
His spouse, or slave; and mount the skies no more.
For me, to lawless love no longer led,
I scorn the coward, and detest his bed;
Else should I merit everlasting shame,
And keen reproach, from every Phrygian dame:
Ill suits it now the joys of love to know,
Too deep my anguish, and too wild my woe.â


[Illustration: ] VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS


Then thus incensed, the Paphian queen replies:
âObey the power from whom thy glories rise:
Should Venus leave thee, every charm must fly,
Fade from thy cheek, and languish in thy eye.
Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee more
The worldâs aversion, than their love before;
Now the bright prize for which mankind engage,
Than, the sad victim, of the public rage.â

At this, the fairest of her sex obeyâd,
And veilâd her blushes in a silken shade;
Unseen, and silent, from the train she moves,
Led by the goddess of the Smiles and Loves.
Arrived, and enterâd at the palace gate,
The maids officious round their mistress wait;
Then, all dispersing, various tasks attend;
The queen and goddess to the prince ascend.
Full in her Parisâ sight, the queen of love
Had placed the beauteous progeny of Jove;
Where, as he viewâd her charms, she turnâd away
Her glowing eyes, and thus began to say:

âIs this the chief, who, lost to sense of shame,
Late fled the field, and yet survives his fame?
O hadst thou died beneath the righteous sword
Of that brave man whom once I callâd my lord!
The boaster Paris oft desired the day
With Spartaâs king to meet in single fray:
Go now, once more thy rivalâs rage excite,
Provoke Atrides, and renew the fight:
Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskillâd
Shouldst fall an easy conquest on the field.â

The prince replies: âAh cease, divinely fair,
Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear;
This day the foe prevailâd by Pallasâ power:
We yet may vanquish in a happier hour:
There want not gods to favour us above;
But let the business of our life be love:
These softer moments let delights employ,
And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy.
Not thus I loved thee, when from Spartaâs shore
My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore,
When first entranced in Cranaeâs isle I lay,[124]
Mixâd with thy soul, and all dissolved away!â
Thus having spoke, the enamourâd Phrygian boy
Rushâd to the bed, impatient for the joy.
Him Helen followâd slow with bashful charms,
And claspâd the blooming hero in her arms.

While these to loveâs delicious rapture yield,
The stern Atrides rages round the field:
So some fell lion whom the woods obey,
Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.
Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy,
But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy;
Even those had yielded to a foe so brave
The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.
Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose,
âYe Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!
Hear and attest! from Heaven with conquest crownâd,
Our brotherâs arms the just success have found:
Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restorâd,
Let Argive Helen own her lawful lord;
The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
And age to age record this signal day.â

He ceased; his armyâs loud applauses rise,
And the long shout runs echoing through the skies.


[Illustration: ] VENUS

[Illustration: ] Map, titled âGRÃCIÃ ANTIQUÃâ




BOOK IV.


ARGUMENT.


THE BREACH OF THE TRUCE, AND THE FIRST BATTLE.


The gods deliberate in council concerning the Trojan war: they agree
upon the continuation of it, and Jupiter sends down Minerva to break
the truce. She persuades Pandarus to aim an arrow at Menelaus, who is
wounded, but cured by Machaon. In the meantime some of the Trojan
troops attack the Greeks. Agamemnon is distinguished in all the parts
of a good general; he reviews the troops, and exhorts the leaders, some
by praises and others by reproof. Nestor is particularly celebrated for
his military discipline. The battle joins, and great numbers are slain
on both sides.
    The same day continues through this as through the last book (as it
    does also through the two following, and almost to the end of the
    seventh book). The scene is wholly in the field before Troy.


And now Olympusâ shining gates unfold;
The gods, with Jove, assume their thrones of gold:
Immortal Hebe, fresh with bloom divine,
The golden goblet crowns with purple wine:
While the full bowls flow round, the powers employ
Their careful eyes on long-contended Troy.

When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturniaâs spleen,
Thus waked the fury of his partial queen,
âTwo powers divine the son of Atreus aid,
Imperial Juno, and the martial maid;[125]
But high in heaven they sit, and gaze from far,
The tame spectators of his deeds of war.
Not thus fair Venus helps her favourâd knight,
The queen of pleasures shares the toils of fight,
Each danger wards, and constant in her care,
Saves in the moment of the last despair.
Her act has rescued Parisâ forfeit life,
Though great Atrides gainâd the glorious strife.
Then say, ye powers! what signal issue waits
To crown this deed, and finish all the fates!
Shall Heaven by peace the bleeding kingdoms spare,
Or rouse the furies, and awake the war?
Yet, would the gods for human good provide,
Atrides soon might gain his beauteous bride,
Still Priamâs walls in peaceful honours grow,
And through his gates the crowding nations flow.â

Thus while he spoke, the queen of heaven, enraged,
And queen of war, in close consult engaged:
Apart they sit, their deep designs employ,
And meditate the future woes of Troy.
Though secret anger swellâd Minervaâs breast,
The prudent goddess yet her wrath suppressâd;
But Juno, impotent of passion, broke
Her sullen silence, and with fury spoke:


[Illustration: ] THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS


âShall then, O tyrant of the ethereal reign!
My schemes, my labours, and my hopes be vain?
Have I, for this, shook Ilion with alarms,
Assembled nations, set two worlds in arms?
To spread the war, I flew from shore to shore;
The immortal coursers scarce the labour bore.
At length ripe vengeance oâer their heads impends,
But Jove himself the faithless race defends.
Loth as thou art to punish lawless lust,
Not all the gods are partial and unjust.â

The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies,
Sighs from his inmost soul, and thus replies:
âOh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hate
To Phrygiaâs monarch, and the Phrygian state!
What high offence has fired the wife of Jove?
Can wretched mortals harm the powers above,
That Troy, and Troyâs whole race thou wouldst confound,
And yon fair structures level with the ground!
Haste, leave the skies, fulfil thy stern desire,
Burst all her gates, and wrap her walls in fire!
Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more,
Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore:
To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given,
Till vast destruction glut the queen of heaven!
So let it be, and Jove his peace enjoy,[126]
When heaven no longer hears the name of Troy.
But should this arm prepare to wreak our hate
On thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their fate;
Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay,
Remember Troy, and give the vengeance way.
For know, of all the numerous towns that rise
Beneath the rolling sun and starry skies,
Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy,
None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.
No mortals merit more distinguishâd grace
Than godlike Priam, or than Priamâs race.
Still to our name their hecatombs expire,
And altars blaze with unextinguishâd fire.â

At this the goddess rolled her radiant eyes,
Then on the Thunderer fixâd them, and replies:
âThree towns are Junoâs on the Grecian plains,
More dear than all the extended earth contains,
Mycenae, Argos, and the Spartan wall;[127]

These thou mayst raze, nor I forbid their fall:
âTis not in me the vengeance to remove;
The crimeâs sufficient that they share my love.
Of power superior why should I complain?
Resent I may, but must resent in vain.
Yet some distinction Juno might require,
Sprung with thyself from one celestial sire,
A goddess born, to share the realms above,
And styled the consort of the thundering Jove;
Nor thou a wife and sisterâs right deny;[128]
Let both consent, and both by terms comply;
So shall the gods our joint decrees obey,
And heaven shall act as we direct the way.
See ready Pallas waits thy high commands
To raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands;
Their sudden friendship by her arts may cease,
And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace.â

The sire of men and monarch of the sky
The advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,
Dissolve the league, and all her arts employ
To make the breach the faithless act of Troy.
Fired with the charge, she headlong urged her flight,
And shot like lightning from Olympusâ height.
As the red comet, from Saturnius sent
To fright the nations with a dire portent,
(A fatal sign to armies on the plain,
Or trembling sailors on the wintry main,)
With sweeping glories glides along in air,
And shakes the sparkles from its blazing hair:[129]
Between both armies thus, in open sight
Shot the bright goddess in a trail of light,
With eyes erect the gazing hosts admire
The power descending, and the heavens on fire!
âThe gods (they cried), the gods this signal sent,
And fate now labours with some vast event:
Jove seals the league, or bloodier scenes prepares;
Jove, the great arbiter of peace and wars.â

They said, while Pallas through the Trojan throng,
(In shape a mortal,) passâd disguised along.
Like bold Laodocus, her course she bent,
Who from Antenor traced his high descent.
Amidst the ranks Lycaonâs son she found,
The warlike Pandarus, for strength renownâd;
Whose squadrons, led from black Ãsepusâ flood,[130]
With flaming shields in martial circle stood.
To him the goddess: âPhrygian! canst thou hear
A well-timed counsel with a willing ear?
What praise were thine, couldst thou direct thy dart,
Amidst his triumph, to the Spartanâs heart?
What gifts from Troy, from Paris wouldst thou gain,
Thy countryâs foe, the Grecian glory slain?
Then seize the occasion, dare the mighty deed,
Aim at his breast, and may that aim succeed!
But first, to speed the shaft, address thy vow
To Lycian PhÅbus with the silver bow,
And swear the firstlings of thy flock to pay,
On Zeliaâs altars, to the god of day.â[131]

He heard, and madly at the motion pleased,
His polishâd bow with hasty rashness seized.
âTwas formâd of horn, and smoothâd with artful toil:
A mountain goat resignâd the shining spoil.
Who pierced long since beneath his arrows bled;
The stately quarry on the cliffs lay dead,
And sixteen palms his browâs large honours spread:
The workmen joinâd, and shaped the bended horns,
And beaten gold each taper point adorns.
This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior bends,
Screenâd by the shields of his surrounding friends:
There meditates the mark; and couching low,
Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.
One from a hundred featherâd deaths he chose,
Fated to wound, and cause of future woes;
Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown
Apolloâs altars in his native town.

Now with full force the yielding horn he bends,
Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends;
Close to his breast he strains the nerve below,
Till the barbâd points approach the circling bow;
The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;
Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.

But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour
The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power,
Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force)
Diverts the weapon from its destined course:
So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye,
The watchful mother wafts the envenomâd fly.
Just where his belt with golden buckles joinâd,
Where linen folds the double corslet lined,
She turnâd the shaft, which, hissing from above,
Passâd the broad belt, and through the corslet drove;
The folds it pierced, the plaited linen tore,
And razed the skin, and drew the purple gore.
As when some stately trappings are decreed
To grace a monarch on his bounding steed,
A nymph in Caria or Maeonia bred,
Stains the pure ivory with a lively red;
With equal lustre various colours vie,
The shining whiteness, and the Tyrian dye:
So great Atrides! showâd thy sacred blood,
As down thy snowy thigh distillâd the streaming flood.
With horror seized, the king of men descried
The shaft infixâd, and saw the gushing tide:
Nor less the Spartan fearâd, before he found
The shining barb appear above the wound,
Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manly breast,
The royal brother thus his grief expressâd,
And graspâd his hand; while all the Greeks around
With answering sighs returnâd the plaintive sound.

âOh, dear as life! did I for this agree
The solemn truce, a fatal truce to thee!
Wert thou exposed to all the hostile train,
To fight for Greece, and conquer, to be slain!
The race of Trojans in thy ruin join,
And faith is scornâd by all the perjured line.
Not thus our vows, confirmâd with wine and gore,
Those hands we plighted, and those oaths we swore,
Shall all be vain: when Heavenâs revenge is slow,
Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer blow.
The day shall come, that great avenging day,
When Troyâs proud glories in the dust shall lay,
When Priamâs powers and Priamâs self shall fall,
And one prodigious ruin swallow all.
I see the god, already, from the pole
Bare his red arm, and bid the thunder roll;
I see the Eternal all his fury shed,
And shake his aegis oâer their guilty head.
Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait;
But thou, alas! deservâst a happier fate.
Still must I mourn the period of thy days,
And only mourn, without my share of praise?
Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no more
Shall dream of conquests on the hostile shore;
Troy seized of Helen, and our glory lost,
Thy bones shall moulder on a foreign coast;
While some proud Trojan thus insulting cries,
(And spurns the dust where Menelaus lies,)
âSuch are the trophies Greece from Ilion brings,
And such the conquest of her king of kings!
Lo his proud vessels scatterâd oâer the main,
And unrevenged, his mighty brother slain.â
Oh! ere that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
Oâerwhelm me, earth! and hide a monarchâs shame.â

He said: a leaderâs and a brotherâs fears
Possess his soul, which thus the Spartan cheers:
âLet not thy words the warmth of Greece abate;
The feeble dart is guiltless of my fate:
Stiff with the rich embroiderâd work around,
My varied belt repellâd the flying wound.â

To whom the king: âMy brother and my friend,
Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy life defend!
Now seek some skilful hand, whose powerful art
May stanch the effusion, and extract the dart.
Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bring
His speedy succour to the Spartan king;
Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy),
The Grecianâs sorrow, and the Dardanâs joy.â

With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies;
Through the thick files he darts his searching eyes,
And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands[132]
In arms incircled with his native bands.
Then thus: âMachaon, to the king repair,
His wounded brother claims thy timely care;
Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow,
A grief to us, a triumph to the foe.â

The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man:
Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.
The dauntless king yet standing firm he found,
And all the chiefs in deep concern around.
Where to the steely point the reed was joinâd,
The shaft he drew, but left the head behind.
Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced,
He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced;
Then suckâd the blood, and sovereign balm infused,[133]
Which Chiron gave, and Ãsculapius used.

While round the prince the Greeks employ their care,
The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war;
Once more they glitter in refulgent arms,
Once more the fields are fillâd with dire alarms.
Nor had you seen the king of men appear
Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear;
But fond of glory, with severe delight,
His beating bosom claimâd the rising fight.
No longer with his warlike steeds he stayâd,
Or pressâd the car with polishâd brass inlaid
But left Eurymedon the reins to guide;
The fiery coursers snorted at his side.
On foot through all the martial ranks he moves
And these encourages, and those reproves.
âBrave men!â he cries, (to such who boldly dare
Urge their swift steeds to face the coming war),
âYour ancient valour on the foes approve;
Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove.
âTis not for us, but guilty Troy, to dread,
Whose crimes sit heavy on her perjured head;
Her sons and matrons Greece shall lead in chains,
And her dead warriors strew the mournful plains.â

Thus with new ardour he the brave inspires;
Or thus the fearful with reproaches fires:
âShame to your country, scandal of your kind;
Born to the fate ye well deserve to find!
Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain,
Prepared for flight, but doomâd to fly in vain?
Confused and panting thus, the hunted deer
Falls as he flies, a victim to his fear.
Still must ye wait the foes, and still retire,
Till yon tall vessels blaze with Trojan fire?
Or trust ye, Jove a valiant foe shall chase,
To save a trembling, heartless, dastard race?â

This said, he stalkâd with ample strides along,
To Creteâs brave monarch and his martial throng;
High at their head he saw the chief appear,
And bold Meriones excite the rear.
At this the king his generous joy expressâd,
And claspâd the warrior to his armed breast.
âDivine Idomeneus! what thanks we owe
To worth like thine! what praise shall we bestow?
To thee the foremost honours are decreed,
First in the fight and every graceful deed.
For this, in banquets, when the generous bowls
Restore our blood, and raise the warriorsâ souls,
Though all the rest with stated rules we bound,
Unmixâd, unmeasured, are thy goblets crownâd.
Be still thyself, in arms a mighty name;
Maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame.â
To whom the Cretan thus his speech addressâd:
âSecure of me, O king! exhort the rest.
Fixâd to thy side, in every toil I share,
Thy firm associate in the day of war.
But let the signal be this moment given;
To mix in fight is all I ask of Heaven.
The field shall prove how perjuries succeed,
And chains or death avenge the impious deed.â

Charmâd with this heat, the king his course pursues,
And next the troops of either Ajax views:
In one firm orb the bands were ranged around,
A cloud of heroes blackenâd all the ground.
Thus from the lofty promontoryâs brow
A swain surveys the gathering storm below;
Slow from the main the heavy vapours rise,
Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies,
Till black as night the swelling tempest shows,
The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows:
He dreads the impending storm, and drives his flock
To the close covert of an arching rock.

Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood,
With spears erect, a moving iron wood:
A shady light was shot from glimmering shields,
And their brown arms obscured the dusky fields.

âO heroes! worthy such a dauntless train,
Whose godlike virtue we but urge in vain,
(Exclaimâd the king), who raise your eager bands
With great examples, more than loud commands.
Ah! would the gods but breathe in all the rest
Such souls as burn in your exalted breast,
Soon should our arms with just success be crownâd,
And Troyâs proud walls lie smoking on the ground.â

Then to the next the general bends his course;
(His heart exults, and glories in his force);
There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian bands,
And with inspiring eloquence commands;
With strictest order sets his train in arms,
The chiefs advises, and the soldiers warms.
Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him wait,
Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.
The horse and chariots to the front assignâd,
The foot (the strength of war) he ranged behind;
The middle space suspected troops supply,
Inclosed by both, nor left the power to fly;
He gives command to âcurb the fiery steed,
Nor cause confusion, nor the ranks exceed:
Before the rest let none too rashly ride;
No strength nor skill, but just in time, be tried:
The charge once made, no warrior turn the rein,
But fight, or fall; a firm embodied train.
He whom the fortune of the field shall cast
From forth his chariot, mount the next in haste;
Nor seek unpractised to direct the car,
Content with javelins to provoke the war.
Our great forefathers held this prudent course,
Thus ruled their ardour, thus preserved their force;
By laws like these immortal conquests made,
And earthâs proud tyrants low in ashes laid.â

So spoke the master of the martial art,
And touchâd with transport great Atridesâ heart.
âOh! hadst thou strength to match thy brave desires,
And nerves to second what thy soul inspires!
But wasting years, that wither human race,
Exhaust thy spirits, and thy arms unbrace.
What once thou wert, oh ever mightst thou be!
And age the lot of any chief but thee.â

Thus to the experienced prince Atrides cried;
He shook his hoary locks, and thus replied:
âWell might I wish, could mortal wish renew[134]
That strength which once in boiling youth I knew;
Such as I was, when Ereuthalion, slain
Beneath this arm, fell prostrate on the plain.
But heaven its gifts not all at once bestows,
These years with wisdom crowns, with action those:
The field of combat fits the young and bold,
The solemn council best becomes the old:
To you the glorious conflict I resign,
Let sage advice, the palm of age, be mine.â

He said. With joy the monarch marchâd before,
And found Menestheus on the dusty shore,
With whom the firm Athenian phalanx stands;
And next Ulysses, with his subject bands.
Remote their forces lay, nor knew so far
The peace infringed, nor heard the sounds of war;
The tumult late begun, they stood intent
To watch the motion, dubious of the event.
The king, who saw their squadrons yet unmoved,
With hasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved:

âCan Peleusâ son forget a warriorâs part.
And fears Ulysses, skillâd in every art?
Why stand you distant, and the rest expect
To mix in combat which yourselves neglect?
From you âtwas hoped among the first to dare
The shock of armies, and commence the war;
For this your names are callâd before the rest,
To share the pleasures of the genial feast:
And can you, chiefs! without a blush survey
Whole troops before you labouring in the fray?
Say, is it thus those honours you requite?
The first in banquets, but the last in fight.â

Ulysses heard: the heroâs warmth oâerspread
His cheek with blushes: and severe, he said:
âTake back the unjust reproach! Behold we stand
Sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.
If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight,
Behold me plunging in the thickest fight.
Then give thy warrior-chief a warriorâs due,
Who dares to act whateâer thou darâst to view.â
Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies:

âO great in action, and in council wise!
With ours, thy care and ardour are the same,
Nor need I to commend, nor aught to blame.
Sage as thou art, and learnâd in human kind,
Forgive the transport of a martial mind.
Haste to the fight, secure of just amends;
The gods that make, shall keep the worthy, friends.â

He said, and passâd where great Tydides lay,
His steeds and chariots wedged in firm array;
(The warlike Sthenelus attends his side;)[135]
To whom with stern reproach the monarch cried:
âO son of Tydeus! (he, whose strength could tame
The bounding steed, in arms a mighty name)
Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry,
With hands unactive, and a careless eye?
Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fearâd;
Still first in front the matchless prince appearâd:
What glorious toils, what wonders they recite,
Who viewâd him labouring through the ranks of fight?
I saw him once, when gathering martial powers,
A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenaeâs towers;
Armies he askâd, and armies had been given,
Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven;
While dreadful comets glaring from afar,
Forewarnâd the horrors of the Theban war.[136]
Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,
A fearless envoy, he approachâd the foes;
Thebesâ hostile walls unguarded and alone,
Dauntless he enters, and demands the throne.
The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found,
And dared to combat all those chiefs around:
Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord;
For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword.
Stung with the shame, within the winding way,
To bar his passage fifty warriors lay;
Two heroes led the secret squadron on,
Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;
Those fifty slaughterâd in the gloomy vale.
He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale,
Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire;
Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!â

No words the godlike Diomed returnâd,
But heard respectful, and in secret burnâd:
Not so fierce Capaneusâ undaunted son;
Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun:

âWhat needs, O monarch! this invidious praise,
Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess
Our value equal, though our fury less.
With fewer troops we stormâd the Theban wall,
And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,[137]
In impious acts the guilty father died;
The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
Far more than heirs of all our parentsâ fame,
Our glories darken their diminishâd name.â

To him Tydides thus: âMy friend, forbear;
Suppress thy passion, and the king revere:
His high concern may well excuse this rage,
Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage:
His the first praise, were Ilionâs towers oâerthrown,
And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his own.
Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite,
âTis ours to labour in the glorious fight.â

He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling ground
Sprung from his car: his ringing arms resound.
Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar,
Of armâd Tydides rushing to the war.
As when the winds, ascending by degrees,[138]
First move the whitening surface of the seas,
The billows float in order to the shore,
The wave behind rolls on the wave before;
Till, with the growing storm, the deeps arise,
Foam oâer the rocks, and thunder to the skies.
So to the fight the thick battalions throng,
Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along
Sedate and silent move the numerous bands;
No sound, no whisper, but the chiefâs commands,
Those only heard; with awe the rest obey,
As if some god had snatchâd their voice away.
Not so the Trojans; from their host ascends
A general shout that all the region rends.
As when the fleecy flocks unnumberâd stand
In wealthy folds, and wait the milkerâs hand,
The hollow vales incessant bleating fills,
The lambs reply from all the neighbouring hills:
Such clamours rose from various nations round,
Mixâd was the murmur, and confused the sound.
Each host now joins, and each a god inspires,
These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires,
Pale flight around, and dreadful terror reign;
And discord raging bathes the purple plain;
Discord! dire sister of the slaughtering power,
Small at her birth, but rising every hour,
While scarce the skies her horrid head can bound,
She stalks on earth, and shakes the world around;[139]
The nations bleed, whereâer her steps she turns,
The groan still deepens, and the combat burns.

Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed,
To armour armour, lance to lance opposed,
Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew,
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew,
Victors and vanquishâd joinâd promiscuous cries,
And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise;
With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
And slaughterâd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills,
With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills
Rush to the vales, and pourâd along the plain,
Roar through a thousand channels to the main:
The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound;
So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.

The bold Antilochus the slaughter led,
The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:
At great Echepolus the lance arrives,
Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives;
Warmâd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
And shades eternal settle oâer his eyes.
So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood
Of force and fire, its walls besmearâd with blood.
Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,[140]
Seized to despoil, and draggâd the corpse along:
But while he strove to tug the inserted dart,
Agenorâs javelin reachâd the heroâs heart.
His flank, unguarded by his ample shield,
Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field;
The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more;
The soul comes floating in a tide of gore.
Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain;
The war renews, the warriors bleed again:
As oâer their prey rapacious wolves engage,
Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage.

In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell;
Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore
Amid the flocks on silver Simoisâ shore:
The nymph descending from the hills of Ide,
To seek her parents on his flowery side,
Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy,
And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.
Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain,
He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
So falls a poplar, that in watery ground
Raised high the head, with stately branches crownâd,
(Fellâd by some artist with his shining steel,
To shape the circle of the bending wheel,)
Cut down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread,
With all its beauteous honours on its head
There, left a subject to the wind and rain,
And scorchâd by suns, it withers on the plain
Thus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius lies
Stretchâd on the shore, and thus neglected dies.

At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw;
The pointed lance with erring fury flew,
And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.
He drops the corpse of Simoisius slain,
And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.
This saw Ulysses, and with grief enraged,
Strode where the foremost of the foes engaged;
Armâd with his spear, he meditates the wound,
In act to throw; but cautious lookâd around,
Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew,
And trembling heard the javelin as it flew.
A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos came,
Old Priamâs son, Democoon was his name.
The weapon entered close above his ear,
Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;[141]
With piercing shrieks the youth resigns his breath,
His eye-balls darken with the shades of death;
Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound,
And his broad buckler rings against the ground.

Seized with affright the boldest foes appear;
Eâen godlike Hector seems himself to fear;
Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled;
The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead:
But PhÅbus now from Ilionâs towering height
Shines forth revealâd, and animates the fight.
âTrojans, be bold, and force with force oppose;
Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!
Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribbâd with steel;
Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel.
Have ye forgot what seemâd your dread before?
The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more.â

Apollo thus from Ilionâs lofty towers,
Arrayâd in terrors, roused the Trojan powers:
While warâs fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe,
And shouts and thunders in the fields below.
Then great Diores fell, by doom divine,
In vain his valour and illustrious line.
A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw,
(Who from cold Ãnus led the Thracian crew,)[142]
Full on his ankle droppâd the ponderous stone,
Burst the strong nerves, and crashâd the solid bone.
Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands,
Before his helpless friends, and native bands,
And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.
The foe rushâd furious as he pants for breath,
And through his navel drove the pointed death:
His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground,
And the warm life came issuing from the wound.

His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent,
Deep in his breast above the pap it went,
Amid the lungs was fixâd the winged wood,
And quivering in his heaving bosom stood:
Till from the dying chief, approaching near,
The Ãtolian warrior tuggâd his weighty spear:
Then sudden waved his flaming falchion round,
And gashâd his belly with a ghastly wound;
The corpse now breathless on the bloody plain,
To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain;
The Thracian bands against the victor pressâd,
A grove of lances glitterâd at his breast.
Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes,
In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.

Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace,
And one the leader of the Epeian race;
Deathâs sable shade at once oâercast their eyes,
In dust the vanquishâd and the victor lies.
With copious slaughter all the fields are red,
And heapâd with growing mountains of the dead.

Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,
By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field;
Might darts be bid to turn their points away,
And swords around him innocently play;
The warâs whole art with wonder had he seen,
And counted heroes where he counted men.

So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired,
And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired.

[Illustration: ] Map of the Plain of Troy




BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.


THE ACTS OF DIOMED.


Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this dayâs battle.
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables
him to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending
with any of the former, excepting Venus. Ãneas joins Pandarus to oppose
him; Pandarus is killed, and Ãneas in great danger but for the
assistance of Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight, is
wounded on the hand by Diomed. Apollo seconds her in his rescue, and at
length carries off Ãneas to Troy, where he is healed in the temple of
Pergamus. Mars rallies the Trojans, and assists Hector to make a stand.
In the meantime Ãneas is restored to the field, and they overthrow
several of the Greeks; among the rest Tlepolemus is slain by Sarpedon.
Juno and Minerva descend to resist Mars; the latter incites Diomed to
go against that god; he wounds him, and sends him groaning to heaven.
    The first battle continues through this book. The scene is the same
    as in the former.


But Pallas now Tydidesâ soul inspires,[143]
Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires,
Above the Greeks his deathless fame to raise,
And crown her hero with distinguishâd praise.
High on his helm celestial lightnings play,
His beamy shield emits a living ray;
The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies,
Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies,
When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight,
And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light.
Such glories Pallas on the chief bestowâd,
Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flowâd:
Onward she drives him, furious to engage,
Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage.

The sons of Dares first the combat sought,
A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault;
In Vulcanâs fane the fatherâs days were led,
The sons to toils of glorious battle bred;
These singled from their troops the fight maintain,
These, from their steeds, Tydides on the plain.
Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near,
And first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear,
Which oâer the warriorâs shoulder took its course,
And spent in empty air its erring force.
Not so, Tydides, flew thy lance in vain,
But pierced his breast, and stretchâd him on the plain.
Seized with unusual fear, Idaeus fled,
Left the rich chariot, and his brother dead.
And had not Vulcan lent celestial aid,
He too had sunk to deathâs eternal shade;
But in a smoky cloud the god of fire
Preserved the son, in pity to the sire.
The steeds and chariot, to the navy led,
Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed.

Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,
Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view;
When by the blood-stainâd hand Minerva pressâd
The god of battles, and this speech addressâd:

âStern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,
Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide;
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
While we from interdicted fields retire,
Nor tempt the wrath of heavenâs avenging sire.â

Her words allay the impetuous warriorâs heat,
The god of arms and martial maid retreat;
Removed from fight, on Xanthusâ flowery bounds
They sat, and listenâd to the dying sounds.

Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,
And some bold chieftain every leader slew:
First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,
His death ennobled by Atridesâ hand:

As he to flight his wheeling car addressâd,
The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,
His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.

Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! doomâd to feel
The great Idomeneusâ protended steel;
Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)
From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
The Cretan javelin reachâd him from afar,
And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car;
Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,
And everlasting shades his eyes surround.

Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase,
In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;
Diana taught him all her sylvan arts,
To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:
But vainly here Dianaâs arts he tries,
The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;
From Menelausâ arm the weapon sent,
Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:
Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
His brazen armour rings against the ground.

Next artful Phereclus untimely fell;
Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
Thy fatherâs skill, O Phereclus! was thine,
The graceful fabric and the fair design;
For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart
To him the shipwrightâs and the builderâs art.
Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose,
The fatal cause of all his countryâs woes;
But he, the mystic will of heaven unknown,
Nor saw his countryâs peril, nor his own.
The hapless artist, while confused he fled,
The spear of Merion mingled with the dead.
Through his right hip, with forceful fury cast,
Between the bladder and the bone it passâd;
Prone on his knees he falls with fruitless cries,
And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes.

From Megesâ force the swift Pedaeus fled,
Antenorâs offspring from a foreign bed,
Whose generous spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair,
Nursed the young stranger with a motherâs care.
How vain those cares! when Meges in the rear
Full in his nape infixâd the fatal spear;
Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides,
And the cold tongue and grinning teeth divides.

Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine,
Sprung from the brave Dolopionâs mighty line,
Who near adored Scamander made abode,
Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god.
On him, amidst the flying numbers found,
Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound;
On his broad shoulders fell the forceful brand,
Thence glancing downwards, loppâd his holy hand,
Which stainâd with sacred blood the blushing sand.
Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of death
Closed his dim eye, and fate suppressâd his breath.

Thus toilâd the chiefs, in different parts engaged.
In every quarter fierce Tydides raged;
Amid the Greek, amid the Trojan train,
Rapt through the ranks he thunders oâer the plain;
Now here, now there, he darts from place to place,
Pours on the rear, or lightens in their face.
Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strong
Deluge whole fields, and sweep the trees along,
Through ruinâd moles the rushing wave resounds,
Oâerwhelmâs the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds;
The yellow harvests of the ripenâd year,
And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear![144]
While Jove descends in sluicy sheets of rain,
And all the labours of mankind are vain.

So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire,
Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire.
With grief the leader of the Lycian band
Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand:
His bended bow against the chief he drew;
Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew,
Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore,
Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore:
The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed,
While the proud archer thus exulting cried:

âHither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds!
Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds,
Not long the deathful dart he can sustain;
Or PhÅbus urged me to these fields in vain.â
So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart
Stoppâd short of life, and mockâd the shooterâs art.
The wounded chief, behind his car retired,
The helping hand of Sthenelus required;
Swift from his seat he leapâd upon the ground,
And tuggâd the weapon from the gushing wound;
When thus the king his guardian power addressâd,
The purple current wandering oâer his vest:

âO progeny of Jove! unconquerâd maid!
If eâer my godlike sire deserved thy aid,
If eâer I felt thee in the fighting field;
Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.
O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight,
Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guardâst in fight;
And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore,
That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more.â

Thus prayâd Tydides, and Minerva heard,
His nerves confirmâd, his languid spirits cheerâd;
He feels each limb with wonted vigour light;
His beating bosom claimâd the promised fight.
âBe bold, (she cried), in every combat shine,
War be thy province, thy protection mine;
Rush to the fight, and every foe control;
Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul:
Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me,
And all thy godlike father breathes in thee;
Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,[145]
And set to view the warring deities.
These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain;
Nor rashly strive where human force is vain.
If Venus mingle in the martial band,
Her shalt thou wound: so Pallas gives command.â

With that, the blue-eyed virgin wingâd her flight;
The hero rushâd impetuous to the fight;
With tenfold ardour now invades the plain,
Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain.
As on the fleecy flocks when hunger calls,
Amidst the field a brindled lion falls;
If chance some shepherd with a distant dart
The savage wound, he rouses at the smart,
He foams, he roars; the shepherd dares not stay,
But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey;
Heaps fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground,
Then leaps victorious oâer the lofty mound.
Not with less fury stern Tydides flew;
And two brave leaders at an instant slew;
Astynous breathless fell, and by his side,
His peopleâs pastor, good Hypenor, died;
Astynousâ breast the deadly lance receives,
Hypenorâs shoulder his broad falchion cleaves.
Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rage
Abas and Polyidus to engage;
Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old,
Could fate foresee, and mystic dreams unfold;
The youths returnâd not from the doubtful plain,
And the sad father tried his arts in vain;
No mystic dream could make their fates appear,
Though now determined by Tydidesâ spear.

Young Xanthus next, and Thoon felt his rage;
The joy and hope of Phaenopsâ feeble age:
Vast was his wealth, and these the only heirs
Of all his labours and a life of cares.
Cold death oâertakes them in their blooming years,
And leaves the father unavailing tears:
To strangers now descends his heapy store,
The race forgotten, and the name no more.

Two sons of Priam in one chariot ride,
Glittering in arms, and combat side by side.
As when the lordly lion seeks his food
Where grazing heifers range the lonely wood,
He leaps amidst them with a furious bound,
Bends their strong necks, and tears them to the ground:
So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn,
Their steeds and chariot to the navy borne.

With deep concern divine Ãneas viewâd
The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued;
Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies,
Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
At length he found Lycaonâs mighty son;
To whom the chief of Venusâ race begun:

âWhere, Pandarus, are all thy honours now,
Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,
Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivallâd fame,
And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call
That wondrous force by which whole armies fall;
Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies
To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;
(Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
Whoeâer he be, propitiate Jove with prayer;
If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare.â

To him the Lycian: âWhom your eyes behold,
If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:
Such coursers whirl him oâer the dusty field,
So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
If âtis a god, he wears that chiefâs disguise:
Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies,
Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,
And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
I wingâd an arrow, which not idly fell,
The stroke had fixâd him to the gates of hell;
And, but some god, some angry god withstands,
His fate was due to these unerring hands.
Skillâd in the bow, on foot I sought the war,
Nor joinâd swift horses to the rapid car.
Ten polishâd chariots I possessâd at home,
And still they grace Lycaonâs princely dome:
There veilâd in spacious coverlets they stand;
And twice ten coursers wait their lordâs command.
The good old warrior bade me trust to these,
When first for Troy I sailâd the sacred seas;
In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,
And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined,
I heard his counsels with unheedful mind,
And thought the steeds (your large supplies unknown)
Might fail of forage in the straitenâd town;
So took my bow and pointed darts in hand
And left the chariots in my native land.

âToo late, O friend! my rashness I deplore;
These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.
Tydeusâ and Atreusâ sons their points have found,
And undissembled gore pursued the wound.
In vain they bleed: this unavailing bow
Serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe.
In evil hour these bended horns I strung,
And seized the quiver where it idly hung.
Cursed be the fate that sent me to the field
Without a warriorâs arms, the spear and shield!
If eâer with life I quit the Trojan plain,
If eâer I see my spouse and sire again,
This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims,
Broke by my hand, shall feed the blazing flames.â

To whom the leader of the Dardan race:
âBe calm, nor PhÅbusâ honourâd gift disgrace.
The distant dart be praised, though here we need
The rushing chariot and the bounding steed.
Against yon hero let us bend our course,
And, hand to hand, encounter force with force.
Now mount my seat, and from the chariotâs height
Observe my fatherâs steeds, renownâd in fight;
Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
To dare the shock, or urge the rapid race;
Secure with these, through fighting fields we go;
Or safe to Troy, if Jove assist the foe.
Haste, seize the whip, and snatch the guiding rein;
The warriorâs fury let this arm sustain;
Or, if to combat thy bold heart incline,
Take thou the spear, the chariotâs care be mine.â

âO prince! (Lycaonâs valiant son replied)
As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.
The horses, practised to their lordâs command,
Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand;
But, if, unhappy, we desert the fight,
Thy voice alone can animate their flight;
Else shall our fates be numberâd with the dead,
And these, the victorâs prize, in triumph led.
Thine be the guidance, then: with spear and shield
Myself will charge this terror of the field.â

And now both heroes mount the glittering car;
The bounding coursers rush amidst the war;
Their fierce approach bold Sthenelus espied,
Who thus, alarmâd, to great Tydides cried:

âO friend! two chiefs of force immense I see,
Dreadful they come, and bend their rage on thee:
Lo the brave heir of old Lycaonâs line,
And great Ãneas, sprung from race divine!
Enough is given to fame. Ascend thy car!
And save a life, the bulwark of our war.â

At this the hero cast a gloomy look,
Fixâd on the chief with scorn; and thus he spoke:

âMe dost thou bid to shun the coming fight?
Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?
Know, âtis not honest in my soul to fear,
Nor was Tydides born to tremble here.
I hate the cumbrous chariotâs slow advance,
And the long distance of the flying lance;
But while my nerves are strong, my force entire,
Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire.
Nor shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight convey
Those threatening heroes, bear them both away;
One chief at least beneath this arm shall die;
So Pallas tells me, and forbids to fly.
But if she dooms, and if no god withstand,
That both shall fall by one victorious hand,
Then heed my words: my horses here detain,
Fixâd to the chariot by the straitenâd rein;
Swift to Ãneasâ empty seat proceed,
And seize the coursers of ethereal breed;
The race of those, which once the thundering god[146]
For ravishâd Ganymede on Tros bestowâd,
The best that eâer on earthâs broad surface run,
Beneath the rising or the setting sun.
Hence great Anchises stole a breed unknown,
By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon:
Four of this race his ample stalls contain,
And two transport Ãneas oâer the plain.
These, were the rich immortal prize our own,
Through the wide world should make our glory known.â

Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on,
And stern Lycaonâs warlike race begun:

âPrince, thou art met. Though late in vain assailâd,
The spear may enter where the arrow failâd.â

He said, then shook the ponderous lance, and flung;
On his broad shield the sounding weapon rung,
Pierced the tough orb, and in his cuirass hung,
âHe bleeds! the pride of Greece! (the boaster cries,)
Our triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!â
âMistaken vaunter! (Diomed replied;)
Thy dart has erred, and now my spear be tried;
Ye âscape not both; one, headlong from his car,
With hostile blood shall glut the god of war.â

He spoke, and rising hurlâd his forceful dart,
Which, driven by Pallas, pierced a vital part;
Full in his face it enterâd, and betwixt
The nose and eye-ball the proud Lycian fixâd;
Crashâd all his jaws, and cleft the tongue within,
Till the bright point lookâd out beneath the chin.
Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the ground:
Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound;
The starting coursers tremble with affright;
The soul indignant seeks the realms of night.

To guard his slaughterâd friend, Ãneas flies,
His spear extending where the carcase lies;
Watchful he wheels, protects it every way,
As the grim lion stalks around his prey.
Oâer the fallân trunk his ample shield displayâd,
He hides the hero with his mighty shade,
And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes
Behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields
Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
Such men as live in these degenerate days:[147]
He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,
Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,
Full on the bone the pointed marble lights;
Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,
And strippâd the skin, and crackâd the solid bone.
Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains,
His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;
Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies;
A sudden cloud comes swimming oâer his eyes.
There the brave chief, who mighty numbers swayâd,
Oppressâd had sunk to deathâs eternal shade,
But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love
She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,
His danger views with anguish and despair,
And guards her offspring with a motherâs care.
About her much-loved son her arms she throws,
Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
Screenâd from the foe behind her shining veil,
The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail;
Safe through the rushing horse, and featherâd flight
Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.

Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands,
Remainâd unheedful of his lordâs commands:
His panting steeds, removed from out the war,
He fixâd with straitenâd traces to the car,
Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains
The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes:
These in proud triumph to the fleet conveyâd,
No longer now a Trojan lord obeyâd.
That charge to bold Deipylus he gave,
(Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,)
Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein,
And followâd where Tydides swept the plain.

Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes)
The raging chief in chase of Venus flies:
No goddess she, commissionâd to the field,
Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield,
Or fierce Bellona thundering at the wall,
While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall;
He knew soft combats suit the tender dame,
New to the field, and still a foe to fame.
Through breaking ranks his furious course he bends,
And at the goddess his broad lance extends;
Through her bright veil the daring weapon drove,
The ambrosial veil which all the Graces wove;
Her snowy hand the razing steel profaned,
And the transparent skin with crimson stainâd,
From the clear vein a stream immortal flowâd,
Such stream as issues from a wounded god;[148]
Pure emanation! uncorrupted flood!
Unlike our gross, diseased, terrestrial blood:
(For not the bread of man their life sustains,
Nor wineâs inflaming juice supplies their veins:)
With tender shrieks the goddess fillâd the place,
And droppâd her offspring from her weak embrace.
Him PhÅbus took: he casts a cloud around
The fainting chief, and wards the mortal wound.

Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies,
The king insults the goddess as she flies:
âIll with Joveâs daughter bloody fights agree,
The field of combat is no scene for thee:
Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care,
Go, lull the coward, or delude the fair.
Taught by this stroke renounce the warâs alarms,
And learn to tremble at the name of arms.â

Tydides thus. The goddess, seized with dread,
Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.
To aid her, swift the winged Iris flew,
Wrapt in a mist above the warring crew.
The queen of love with faded charms she found.
Pale was her cheek, and livid lookâd the wound.
To Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way:
Far, on the left, with clouds involved he lay;
Beside him stood his lance, distainâd with gore,
And, reinâd with gold, his foaming steeds before.
Low at his knee, she beggâd with streaming eyes
Her brotherâs car, to mount the distant skies,
And showâd the wound by fierce Tydides given,
A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven.
Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain,
And to her hand commits the golden rein;
She mounts the seat, oppressâd with silent woe,
Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.
The lash resounds, the rapid chariot flies,
And in a moment scales the lofty skies:
They stoppâd the car, and there the coursers stood,
Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial food;
Before her mother, loveâs bright queen appears,
Oâerwhelmed with anguish, and dissolved in tears:
She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed,
And askâd what god had wrought this guilty deed?


[Illustration: ] VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS


Then she: âThis insult from no god I found,
An impious mortal gave the daring wound!
Behold the deed of haughty Diomed!
âTwas in the sonâs defence the mother bled.
The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage;
But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage.â

Dione then: âThy wrongs with patience bear,
And share those griefs inferior powers must share:
Unnumberâd woes mankind from us sustain,
And men with woes afflict the gods again.
The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,[149]
And lodged in brazen dungeons underground,
Full thirteen moons imprisonâd roarâd in vain;
Otus and Ephialtes held the chain:
Perhaps had perishâd had not Hermesâ care
Restored the groaning god to upper air.
Great Junoâs self has borne her weight of pain,
The imperial partner of the heavenly reign;
Amphitryonâs son infixâd the deadly dart,[150]
And fillâd with anguish her immortal heart.
Eâen hellâs grim king Alcidesâ power confessâd,
The shaft found entrance in his iron breast;
To Joveâs high palace for a cure he fled,
Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;
Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around,
Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
Rash, impious man! to stain the blessâd abodes,
And drench his arrows in the blood of gods!


[Illustration: ] OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE


âBut thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic deed),
Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed,
Know thou, whoeâer with heavenly power contends,
Short is his date, and soon his glory ends;
From fields of death when late he shall retire,
No infant on his knees shall call him sire.
Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found,
To stretch thee pale and gasping on the ground;
Thy distant wife, ÃgialÃ© the fair,[151]
Starting from sleep with a distracted air,
Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord deplore,
The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!â

This said, she wiped from Venusâ wounded palm
The sacred ichor, and infused the balm.
Juno and Pallas with a smile surveyâd,
And thus to Jove began the blue-eyed maid:

âPermit thy daughter, gracious Jove! to tell
How this mischance the Cyprian queen befell,
As late she tried with passion to inflame
The tender bosom of a Grecian dame;
Allured the fair, with moving thoughts of joy,
To quit her country for some youth of Troy;
The clasping zone, with golden buckles bound,
Razed her soft hand with this lamented wound.â

The sire of gods and men superior smiled,
And, calling Venus, thus addressâd his child:
âNot these, O daughter are thy proper cares,
Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars;
Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms;
To Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms.â

Thus they in heaven: while on the plain below
The fierce Tydides charged his Dardan foe,
Flushâd with celestial blood pursued his way,
And fearless dared the threatening god of day;
Already in his hopes he saw him killâd,
Though screenâd behind Apolloâs mighty shield.
Thrice rushing furious, at the chief he strook;
His blazing buckler thrice Apollo shook:
He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud,
A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

âO son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and see
How vast the difference of the gods and thee;
Distance immense! between the powers that shine
Above, eternal, deathless, and divine,
And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth,
A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth.â

So spoke the god who darts celestial fires:
He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.
Then PhÅbus bore the chief of Venusâ race
To Troyâs high fane, and to his holy place;
Latona there and Phoebe healâd the wound,
With vigour armâd him, and with glory crownâd.
This done, the patron of the silver bow
A phantom raised, the same in shape and show
With great Ãneas; such the form he bore,
And such in fight the radiant arms he wore.
Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,
And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
Meantime on Ilionâs tower Apollo stood,
And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god:

âStern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;
Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,
Rise in thy wrath! to hellâs abhorrâd abodes
Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.
First rosy Venus felt his brutal rage;
Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage:
The wretch would brave high heavenâs immortal sire,
His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire.â

The god of battle issues on the plain,
Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan train;
In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide,
Enraged to Troyâs retiring chiefs he cried:

âHow long, ye sons of Priam! will ye fly,
And unrevenged see Priamâs people die?
Still unresisted shall the foe destroy,
And stretch the slaughter to the gates of Troy?
Lo, brave Ãneas sinks beneath his wound,
Not godlike Hector more in arms renownâd:
Haste all, and take the generous warriorâs part.
He said;ânew courage swellâd each heroâs heart.
Sarpedon first his ardent soul expressâd,
And, turnâd to Hector, these bold words addressâd:

âSay, chief, is all thy ancient valour lost?
Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast,
That proppâd alone by Priamâs race should stand
Troyâs sacred walls, nor need a foreign hand?
Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends,
And the proud vaunt in just derision ends.
Remote they stand while alien troops engage,
Like trembling hounds before the lionâs rage.
Far distant hence I held my wide command,
Where foaming Xanthus laves the Lycian land;
With ample wealth (the wish of mortals) blessâd,
A beauteous wife, and infant at her breast;
With those I left whatever dear could be:
Greece, if she conquers, nothing wins from me;
Yet first in fight my Lycian bands I cheer,
And long to meet this mighty man ye fear;
While Hector idle stands, nor bids the brave
Their wives, their infants, and their altars save.
Haste, warrior, haste! preserve thy threatenâd state,
Or one vast burst of all-involving fate
Full oâer your towers shall fall, and sweep away
Sons, sires, and wives, an undistinguishâd prey.
Rouse all thy Trojans, urge thy aids to fight;
These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night;
With force incessant the brave Greeks oppose;
Such cares thy friends deserve, and such thy foes.â

Stung to the heart the generous Hector hears,
But just reproof with decent silence bears.
From his proud car the prince impetuous springs,
On earth he leaps, his brazen armour rings.
Two shining spears are brandishâd in his hands;
Thus armâd, he animates his drooping bands,
Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
They turn, they stand; the Greeks their fury dare,
Condense their powers, and wait the growing war.

As when, on Ceresâ sacred floor, the swain
Spreads the wide fan to clear the golden grain,
And the light chaff, before the breezes borne,
Ascends in clouds from off the heapy corn;
The grey dust, rising with collected winds,
Drives oâer the barn, and whitens all the hinds:
So white with dust the Grecian host appears,
From trampling steeds, and thundering charioteers.
The dusky clouds from labourâd earth arise,
And roll in smoking volumes to the skies.
Mars hovers oâer them with his sable shield,
And adds new horrors to the darkenâd field:
Pleased with his charge, and ardent to fulfil,
In Troyâs defence, Apolloâs heavenly will:
Soon as from fight the blue-eyed maid retires,
Each Trojan bosom with new warmth he fires.
And now the god, from forth his sacred fane,
Produced Ãneas to the shouting train;
Alive, unharmâd, with all his peers around,
Erect he stood, and vigorous from his wound:
Inquiries none they made; the dreadful day
No pause of words admits, no dull delay;
Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims,
Fame calls, Mars thunders, and the fieldâs in flames.

Stern Diomed with either Ajax stood,
And great Ulysses, bathed in hostile blood.
Embodied close, the labouring Grecian train
The fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.
Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait
Serenely dreadful, and as fixâd as fate.
So when the embattled clouds in dark array,
Along the skies their gloomy lines display;
When now the North his boisterous rage has spent,
And peaceful sleeps the liquid element:
The low-hung vapours, motionless and still,
Rest on the summits of the shaded hill;
Till the mass scatters as the winds arise,
Dispersed and broken through the ruffled skies.

Nor was the general wanting to his train;
From troop to troop he toils through all the plain,
âYe Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear;
Your brave associates and yourselves revere!
Let glorious acts more glorious acts inspire,
And catch from breast to breast the noble fire!
On valourâs side the odds of combat lie,
The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
The wretch who trembles in the field of fame,
Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame!â

These words he seconds with his flying lance,
To meet whose point was strong Deicoonâs chance:
Ãneasâ friend, and in his native place
Honourâd and loved like Priamâs royal race:
Long had he fought the foremost in the field,
But now the monarchâs lance transpierced his shield:
His shield too weak the furious dart to stay,
Through his broad belt the weapon forced its way:
The grisly wound dismissâd his soul to hell,
His arms around him rattled as he fell.

Then fierce Ãneas, brandishing his blade,
In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid,
Whose sire Diocleus, wealthy, brave and great,
In well-built PherÃ¦ held his lofty seat:[152]
Sprung from Alpheusâ plenteous stream, that yields
Increase of harvests to the Pylian fields.
He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he,
And these descended in the third degree.
Too early expert in the martial toil,
In sable ships they left their native soil,
To avenge Atrides: now, untimely slain,
They fell with glory on the Phrygian plain.
So two young mountain lions, nursed with blood
In deep recesses of the gloomy wood,
Rush fearless to the plains, and uncontrollâd
Depopulate the stalls and waste the fold:
Till pierced at distance from their native den,
Oâerpowered they fall beneath the force of men.
Prostrate on earth their beauteous bodies lay,
Like mountain firs, as tall and straight as they.
Great Menelaus views with pitying eyes,
Lifts his bright lance, and at the victor flies;
Mars urged him on; yet, ruthless in his hate,
The god but urged him to provoke his fate.
He thus advancing, Nestorâs valiant son
Shakes for his danger, and neglects his own;
Struck with the thought, should Helenâs lord be slain,
And all his countryâs glorious labours vain.
Already met, the threatening heroes stand;
The spears already tremble in their hand:
In rushâd Antilochus, his aid to bring,
And fall or conquer by the Spartan king.
These seen, the Dardan backward turnâd his course,
Brave as he was, and shunnâd unequal force.
The breathless bodies to the Greeks they drew,
Then mix in combat, and their toils renew.

First, PylÃ¦menes, great in battle, bled,
Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians led.
Atrides markâd him where sublime he stood;
Fixâd in his throat the javelin drank his blood.
The faithful Mydon, as he turnâd from fight
His flying coursers, sunk to endless night;
A broken rock by Nestorâs son was thrown:
His bended arm received the falling stone;
From his numbâd hand the ivory-studded reins,
Droppâd in the dust, are trailâd along the plains:
Meanwhile his temples feel a deadly wound;
He groans in death, and ponderous sinks to ground:
Deep drove his helmet in the sands, and there
The head stood fixâd, the quivering legs in air,
Till trampled flat beneath the coursersâ feet:
The youthful victor mounts his empty seat,
And bears the prize in triumph to the fleet.

Great Hector saw, and, raging at the view,
Pours on the Greeks: the Trojan troops pursue:
He fires his host with animating cries,
And brings along the furies of the skies,
Mars, stern destroyer! and Bellona dread,
Flame in the front, and thunder at their head:
This swells the tumult and the rage of fight;
That shakes a spear that casts a dreadful light.
Where Hector marchâd, the god of battles shined,
Now stormâd before him, and now raged behind.

Tydides paused amidst his full career;
Then first the heroâs manly breast knew fear.
As when some simple swain his cot forsakes,
And wide through fens an unknown journey takes:
If chance a swelling brook his passage stay,
And foam impervious âcross the wandererâs way,
Confused he stops, a length of country passâd,
Eyes the rough waves, and tired, returns at last.
Amazed no less the great Tydides stands:
He stayâd, and turning thus addressâd his bands:

âNo wonder, Greeks! that all to Hector yield;
Secure of favouring gods, he takes the field;
His strokes they second, and avert our spears.
Behold where Mars in mortal arms appears!
Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow;
Retire, but with your faces to the foe.
Trust not too much your unavailing might;
âTis not with Troy, but with the gods ye fight.â

Now near the Greeks the black battalions drew;
And first two leaders valiant Hector slew:
His force Anchialus and Mnesthes found,
In every art of glorious war renownâd;
In the same car the chiefs to combat ride,
And fought united, and united died.
Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax glows
With thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes.
His massy spear with matchless fury sent,
Through Amphiusâ belt and heaving belly went;
Amphius Apaesusâ happy soil possessâd,
With herds abounding, and with treasure blessâd;
But fate resistless from his country led
The chief, to perish at his peopleâs head.
Shook with his fall his brazen armour rung,
And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax sprung;
Around his head an iron tempest rainâd;
A wood of spears his ample shield sustainâd:
Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he pressâd,
And drew his javelin from the bleeding breast:
He could no more; the showering darts denied
To spoil his glittering arms, and plumy pride.
Now foes on foes came pouring on the fields,
With bristling lances, and compacted shields;
Till in the steely circle straitenâd round,
Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground.

While thus they strive, Tlepolemus the great,[153]
Urged by the force of unresisted fate,
Burns with desire Sarpedonâs strength to prove;
Alcidesâ offspring meets the son of Jove.
Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.
Joveâs great descendant, and his greater son.
Prepared for combat, ere the lance he tossâd,
The daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast:

âWhat brings this Lycian counsellor so far,
To tremble at our arms, not mix in war!
Know thy vain self, nor let their flattery move,
Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove.
How far unlike those chiefs of race divine,
How vast the difference of their deeds and thine!
Jove got such heroes as my sire, whose soul
No fear could daunt, nor earth nor hell control.
Troy felt his arm, and yon proud ramparts stand
Raised on the ruins of his vengeful hand:
With six small ships, and but a slender train,
He left the town a wide-deserted plain.
But what art thou, who deedless lookâst around,
While unrevenged thy Lycians bite the ground!
Small aid to Troy thy feeble force can be;
But wert thou greater, thou must yield to me.
Pierced by my spear, to endless darkness go!
I make this present to the shades below.â

The son of Hercules, the Rhodian guide,
Thus haughty spoke. The Lycian king replied:

âThy sire, O prince! oâerturnâd the Trojan state,
Whose perjured monarch well deserved his fate;
Those heavenly steeds the hero sought so far,
False he detainâd, the just reward of war.
Nor so content, the generous chief defied,
With base reproaches and unmanly pride.
But you, unworthy the high race you boast,
Shall raise my glory when thy own is lost:
Now meet thy fate, and by Sarpedon slain,
Add one more ghost to Plutoâs gloomy reign.â

He said: both javelins at an instant flew;
Both struck, both wounded, but Sarpedonâs slew:
Full in the boasterâs neck the weapon stood,
Transfixâd his throat, and drank the vital blood;
The soul disdainful seeks the caves of night,
And his sealâd eyes for ever lose the light.

Yet not in vain, Tlepolemus, was thrown
Thy angry lance; which piercing to the bone
Sarpedonâs thigh, had robbâd the chief of breath;
But Jove was present, and forbade the death.
Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng,
The wounded hero draggâd the lance along.
(His friends, each busied in his several part,
Through haste, or danger, had not drawn the dart.)
The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired;
Whose fall Ulysses viewâd, with fury fired;
Doubtful if Joveâs great son he should pursue,
Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew.
But heaven and fate the first design withstand,
Nor this great death must grace Ulyssesâ hand.
Minerva drives him on the Lycian train;
Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strewâd the plain,
Alcander, Prytanis, NoÃ«mon fell:[154]
And numbers more his sword had sent to hell,
But Hector saw; and, furious at the sight,
Rushâd terrible amidst the ranks of fight.
With joy Sarpedon viewâd the wishâd relief,
And, faint, lamenting, thus implored the chief:

âO suffer not the foe to bear away
My helpless corpse, an unassisted prey;
If I, unblessâd, must see my son no more,
My much-loved consort, and my native shore,
Yet let me die in Ilionâs sacred wall;
Troy, in whose cause I fell, shall mourn my fall.â

He said, nor Hector to the chief replies,
But shakes his plume, and fierce to combat flies;
Swift as a whirlwind, drives the scattering foes;
And dyes the ground with purple as he goes.

Beneath a beech, Joveâs consecrated shade,
His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid:
Brave Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nigh,
Who wrenchâd the javelin from his sinewy thigh.
The fainting soul stood ready wingâd for flight,
And oâer his eye-balls swam the shades of night;
But Boreas rising fresh, with gentle breath,
Recallâd his spirit from the gates of death.

The generous Greeks recede with tardy pace,
Though Mars and Hector thunder in their face;
None turn their backs to mean ignoble flight,
Slow they retreat, and even retreating fight.
Who first, who last, by Marsâ and Hectorâs hand,
Stretchâd in their blood, lay gasping on the sand?
Tenthras the great, Orestes the renownâd
For managed steeds, and Trechus pressâd the ground;
Next Ånomaus and OEnopsâ offspring died;
Oresbius last fell groaning at their side:
Oresbius, in his painted mitre gay,
In fat BÅotia held his wealthy sway,
Where lakes surround low Hyleâs watery plain;
A prince and people studious of their gain.

The carnage Juno from the skies surveyâd,
And touchâd with grief bespoke the blue-eyed maid:
âOh, sight accursed! Shall faithless Troy prevail,
And shall our promise to our people fail?
How vain the word to Menelaus given
By Joveâs great daughter and the queen of heaven,
Beneath his arms that Priamâs towers should fall,
If warring gods for ever guard the wall!
Mars, red with slaughter, aids our hated foes:
Haste, let us arm, and force with force oppose!â

She spoke; Minerva burns to meet the war:
And now heavenâs empress calls her blazing car.
At her command rush forth the steeds divine;
Rich with immortal gold their trappings shine.
Bright Hebe waits; by Hebe, ever young,
The whirling wheels are to the chariot hung.
On the bright axle turns the bidden wheel
Of sounding brass; the polished axle steel.
Eight brazen spokes in radiant order flame;
The circles gold, of uncorrupted frame,
Such as the heavens produce: and round the gold
Two brazen rings of work divine were rollâd.
The bossy naves of sold silver shone;
Braces of gold suspend the moving throne:
The car, behind, an arching figure bore;
The bending concave formâd an arch before.
Silver the beam, the extended yoke was gold,
And golden reins the immortal coursers hold.
Herself, impatient, to the ready car,
The coursers joins, and breathes revenge and war.

Pallas disrobes; her radiant veil untied,
With flowers adornâd, with art diversified,
(The laboured veil her heavenly fingers wove,)
Flows on the pavement of the court of Jove.
Now heavenâs dread arms her mighty limbs invest,
Joveâs cuirass blazes on her ample breast;
Deckâd in sad triumph for the mournful field,
Oâer her broad shoulders hangs his horrid shield,
Dire, black, tremendous! Round the margin rollâd,
A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold:
Here all the terrors of grim War appear,
Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and Fear,
Here stormâd Contention, and here Fury frownâd,
And the dire orb portentous Gorgon crownâd.
The massy golden helm she next assumes,
That dreadful nods with four oâershading plumes;
So vast, the broad circumference contains
A hundred armies on a hundred plains.
The goddess thus the imperial car ascends;
Shook by her arm the mighty javelin bends,
Ponderous and huge; that when her fury burns,
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts oâerturns.

Swift at the scourge the ethereal coursers fly,
While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky.
Heavenâs gates spontaneous open to the powers,[155]
Heavenâs golden gates, kept by the winged Hours;[156]
Commissionâd in alternate watch they stand,
The sunâs bright portals and the skies command,
Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day,
Or the dark barrier roll with ease away.
The sounding hinges ring, on either side
The gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.
The chariot mounts, where deep in ambient skies,
Confused, Olympusâ hundred heads arise;
Where far apart the Thunderer fills his throne,
Oâer all the gods superior and alone.
There with her snowy hand the queen restrains
The fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains:

âO sire! can no resentment touch thy soul?
Can Mars rebel, and does no thunder roll?
What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain,
What rash destruction! and what heroes slain!
Venus, and PhÅbus with the dreadful bow,
Smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe.
Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mind
No god can govern, and no justice bind.
Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride,
And drive from fight the impetuous homicide?â

To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said:
âGo! and the great Minerva be thy aid.
To tame the monster-god Minerva knows,
And oft afflicts his brutal breast with woes.â

He said; Saturnia, ardent to obey,
Lashâd her white steeds along the aerial way.
Swift down the steep of heaven the chariot rolls,
Between the expanded earth and starry poles.
Far as a shepherd, from some point on high,[157]
Oâer the wide main extends his boundless eye,
Through such a space of air, with thundering sound,
At every leap the immortal coursers bound
Troy now they reachâd and touchâd those banks divine,
Where silver Simois and Scamander join.
There Juno stoppâd, and (her fair steeds unloosed)
Of air condensed a vapour circumfused:
For these, impregnate with celestial dew,
On Simoisâ brink ambrosial herbage grew.
Thence to relieve the fainting Argive throng,
Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.

The best and bravest of the Grecian band
(A warlike circle) round Tydides stand.
Such was their look as lions bathed in blood,
Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.
Heavenâs empress mingles with the mortal crowd,
And shouts, in Stentorâs sounding voice, aloud;
Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,[158]
Whose throats surpassâd the force of fifty tongues.

âInglorious Argives! to your race a shame,
And only men in figure and in name!
Once from the walls your timorous foes engaged,
While fierce in war divine Achilles raged;
Now issuing fearless they possess the plain,
Now win the shores, and scarce the seas remain.â

Her speech new fury to their hearts conveyâd;
While near Tydides stood the Athenian maid;
The king beside his panting steeds she found,
Oâerspent with toil reposing on the ground;
To cool his glowing wound he sat apart,
(The wound inflicted by the Lycian dart.)
Large drops of sweat from all his limbs descend,
Beneath his ponderous shield his sinews bend,
Whose ample belt, that oâer his shoulder lay,
He eased; and washâd the clotted gore away.
The goddess leaning oâer the bending yoke,
Beside his coursers, thus her silence broke:

âDegenerate prince! and not of Tydeusâ kind,
Whose little body lodged a mighty mind;
Foremost he pressâd in glorious toils to share,
And scarce refrainâd when I forbade the war.
Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go,
And feast, incircled by the Theban foe;
There braved, and vanquishâd, many a hardy knight;
Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight.
Thou too no less hast been my constant care;
Thy hands I armâd, and sent thee forth to war:
But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains;
No drop of all thy father warms thy veins.â

The chief thus answered mild: âImmortal maid!
I own thy presence, and confess thy aid.
Not fear, thou knowâst, withholds me from the plains,
Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains:
From warring gods thou badâst me turn my spear,
And Venus only found resistance here.
Hence, goddess! heedful of thy high commands,
Loth I gave way, and warnâd our Argive bands:
For Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld,
With slaughter red, and raging round the field.â

Then thus Minerva:ââBrave Tydides, hear!
Not Mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear.
Full on the god impel thy foaming horse:
Pallas commands, and Pallas lends thee force.
Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies,
And every side of wavering combat tries;
Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made:
Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid.â[159]

She said, and to the steeds approaching near,
Drew from his seat the martial charioteer.
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends,
Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends:
The groaning axle bent beneath the load;
So great a hero, and so great a god.
She snatchâd the reins, she lashâd with all her force,
And full on Mars impelled the foaming horse:
But first, to hide her heavenly visage, spread
Black Orcusâ helmet oâer her radiant head.


[Illustration: ] DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS


Just then gigantic Periphas lay slain,
The strongest warrior of the Ãtolian train;
The god, who slew him, leaves his prostrate prize
Stretchâd where he fell, and at Tydides flies.
Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appear
The daring Greek, the dreadful god of war!
Full at the chief, above his courserâs head,
From Marsâs arm the enormous weapon fled:
Pallas opposed her hand, and caused to glance
Far from the car the strong immortal lance.
Then threw the force of Tydeusâ warlike son;
The javelin hissâd; the goddess urged it on:
Where the broad cincture girt his armour round,
It pierced the god: his groin received the wound.
From the rent skin the warrior tugs again
The smoking steel. Mars bellows with the pain:
Loud as the roar encountering armies yield,
When shouting millions shake the thundering field.
Both armies start, and trembling gaze around;
And earth and heaven re-bellow to the sound.
As vapours blown by Austerâs sultry breath,
Pregnant with plagues, and shedding seeds of death,
Beneath the rage of burning Sirius rise,
Choke the parchâd earth, and blacken all the skies;
In such a cloud the god from combat driven,
High oâer the dusky whirlwind scales the heaven.
Wild with his pain, he sought the bright abodes,
There sullen sat beneath the sire of gods,
Showâd the celestial blood, and with a groan
Thus pourâd his plaints before the immortal throne:

âCan Jove, supine, flagitious facts survey,
And brook the furies of this daring day?
For mortal men celestial powers engage,
And gods on gods exert eternal rage:
From thee, O father! all these ills we bear,
And thy fell daughter with the shield and spear;
Thou gavest that fury to the realms of light,
Pernicious, wild, regardless of the right.
All heaven beside reveres thy sovereign sway,
Thy voice we hear, and thy behests obey:
âTis hers to offend, and even offending share
Thy breast, thy counsels, thy distinguishâd care:
So boundless she, and thou so partial grown,
Well may we deem the wondrous birth thy own.
Now frantic Diomed, at her command,
Against the immortals lifts his raging hand:
The heavenly Venus first his fury found,
Me next encountering, me he dared to wound;
Vanquishâd I fled; even I, the god of fight,
From mortal madness scarce was saved by flight.
Else hadst thou seen me sink on yonder plain,
Heapâd round, and heaving under loads of slain!
Or pierced with Grecian darts, for ages lie,
Condemnâd to pain, though fated not to die.â

Him thus upbraiding, with a wrathful look
The lord of thunders viewâd, and stern bespoke:
âTo me, perfidious! this lamenting strain?
Of lawless force shall lawless Mars complain?
Of all the gods who tread the spangled skies,
Thou most unjust, most odious in our eyes!
Inhuman discord is thy dire delight,
The waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight.
No bounds, no law, thy fiery temper quells,
And all thy mother in thy soul rebels.
In vain our threats, in vain our power we use;
She gives the example, and her son pursues.
Yet long the inflicted pangs thou shall not mourn,
Sprung since thou art from Jove, and heavenly-born.
Else, singed with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown,
Where chainâd on burning rocks the Titans groan.â

Thus he who shakes Olympus with his nod;
Then gave to PÃ¦onâs care the bleeding god.[160]
With gentle hand the balm he pourâd around,
And healâd the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.
As when the figâs pressâd juice, infused in cream,
To curds coagulates the liquid stream,
Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined;
Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture joinâd.
Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dressâd
His mighty limbs in an immortal vest.
Glorious he sat, in majesty restored,
Fast by the throne of heavenâs superior lord.
Juno and Pallas mount the blessâd abodes,
Their task performâd, and mix among the gods.


[Illustration: ] JUNO




BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.


THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.


The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, the
chief augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to
appoint a solemn procession of the queen and the Trojan matrons to the
temple of Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight. The
battle relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have
an interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge, of
the friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors, they
make exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders of
Helenus, prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking a
tender leave of his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field.
    The scene is first in the field of battle, between the rivers
    Simois and Scamander, and then changes to Troy.


Now heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yield
To human force and human skill the field:
Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes;
Now here, now there, the tide of combat flows;
While Troyâs famed streams, that bound the deathful plain
On either side, run purple to the main.

Great Ajax first to conquest led the way,
Broke the thick ranks, and turnâd the doubtful day.
The Thracian Acamas his falchion found,
And hewâd the enormous giant to the ground;
His thundering arm a deadly stroke impressâd
Where the black horse-hair nodded oâer his crest;
Fixâd in his front the brazen weapon lies,
And seals in endless shades his swimming eyes.
Next Teuthrasâ son distainâd the sands with blood,
Axylus, hospitable, rich, and good:
In fair Arisbeâs walls (his native place)[161]
He held his seat! a friend to human race.
Fast by the road, his ever-open door
Obliged the wealthy, and relieved the poor.
To stern Tydides now he falls a prey,
No friend to guard him in the dreadful day!
Breathless the good man fell, and by his side
His faithful servant, old Calesius died.

By great Euryalus was Dresus slain,
And next he laid Opheltius on the plain.
Two twins were near, bold, beautiful, and young,
From a fair naiad and Bucolion sprung:
(Laomedonâs white flocks Bucolion fed,
That monarchâs first-born by a foreign bed;
In secret woods he won the naiadâs grace,
And two fair infants crownâd his strong embrace:)
Here dead they lay in all their youthful charms;
The ruthless victor strippâd their shining arms.

Astyalus by Polypoetes fell;
Ulyssesâ spear Pidytes sent to hell;
By Teucerâs shaft brave Aretaon bled,
And Nestorâs son laid stern Ablerus dead;
Great Agamemnon, leader of the brave,
The mortal wound of rich Elatus gave,
Who held in Pedasus his proud abode,[162]
And tillâd the banks where silver Satnio flowâd.
Melanthius by Eurypylus was slain;
And Phylacus from Leitus flies in vain.

Unblessâd Adrastus next at mercy lies
Beneath the Spartan spear, a living prize.
Scared with the din and tumult of the fight,
His headlong steeds, precipitate in flight,
Rushâd on a tamariskâs strong trunk, and broke
The shatterâd chariot from the crooked yoke;
Wide oâer the field, resistless as the wind,
For Troy they fly, and leave their lord behind.
Prone on his face he sinks beside the wheel:
Atrides oâer him shakes his vengeful steel;
The fallen chief in suppliant posture pressâd
The victorâs knees, and thus his prayer addressâd:

âO spare my youth, and for the life I owe
Large gifts of price my father shall bestow.
When fame shall tell, that, not in battle slain,
Thy hollow ships his captive son detain:
Rich heaps of brass shall in thy tent be told,[163]
And steel well-temperâd, and persuasive gold.â

He said: compassion touchâd the heroâs heart
He stood, suspended with the lifted dart:
As pity pleaded for his vanquishâd prize,
Stern Agamemnon swift to vengeance flies,
And, furious, thus: âOh impotent of mind![164]
Shall these, shall these Atridesâ mercy find?
Well hast thou known proud Troyâs perfidious land,
And well her natives merit at thy hand!
Not one of all the race, nor sex, nor age,
Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage:
Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all;
Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall fall;[165]
A dreadful lesson of exampled fate,
To warn the nations, and to curb the great!â

The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth addressâd,
To rigid justice steelâd his brotherâs breast.
Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he thrust;
The monarchâs javelin stretchâd him in the dust,
Then pressing with his foot his panting heart,
Forth from the slain he tuggâd the reeking dart.
Old Nestor saw, and roused the warriorâs rage;
âThus, heroes! thus the vigorous combat wage;
No son of Mars descend, for servile gains,
To touch the booty, while a foe remains.
Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!
First gain the conquest, then reward the toil.â

And now had Greece eternal fame acquired,
And frighted Troy within her walls, retired,
Had not sage Helenus her state redressâd,
Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast.
Where Hector stood, with great Ãneas joinâd,
The seer revealâd the counsels of his mind:

âYe generous chiefs! on whom the immortals lay
The cares and glories of this doubtful day;
On whom your aids, your countryâs hopes depend;
Wise to consult, and active to defend!
Here, at our gates, your brave efforts unite,
Turn back the routed, and forbid the flight,
Ere yet their wivesâ soft arms the cowards gain,
The sport and insult of the hostile train.
When your commands have heartenâd every band,
Ourselves, here fixâd, will make the dangerous stand;
Pressâd as we are, and sore of former fight,
These straits demand our last remains of might.
Meanwhile thou, Hector, to the town retire,
And teach our mother what the gods require:
Direct the queen to lead the assembled train
Of Troyâs chief matrons to Minervaâs fane;[166]
Unbar the sacred gates, and seek the power,
With offerâd vows, in Ilionâs topmost tower.
The largest mantle her rich wardrobes hold,
Most prized for art, and labourâd oâer with gold,
Before the goddessâ honourâd knees be spread,
And twelve young heifers to her altars led:
If so the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
Our wives, our infants, and our city spare,
And far avert Tydidesâ wasteful ire,
That mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire;
Not thus Achilles taught our hosts to dread,
Sprung though he was from more than mortal bed;
Not thus resistless ruled the stream of fight,
In rage unbounded, and unmatchâd in might.â

Hector obedient heard: and, with a bound,
Leapâd from his trembling chariot to the ground;
Through all his host inspiring force he flies,
And bids the thunder of the battle rise.
With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow,
And turn the tide of conflict on the foe:
Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling spears;
All Greece recedes, and âmidst her triumphs fears;
Some god, they thought, who ruled the fate of wars,
Shot down avenging from the vault of stars.

Then thus aloud: âYe dauntless Dardans, hear!
And you whom distant nations send to war!
Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore;
Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more.
One hour demands me in the Trojan wall,
To bid our altars flame, and victims fall:
Nor shall, I trust, the matronsâ holy train,
And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain.â

This said, with ample strides the hero passâd;
The shieldâs large orb behind his shoulder cast,
His neck oâershading, to his ankle hung;
And as he marchâd the brazen buckler rung.

Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),[167]
Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeusâ son
Between both armies met: the chiefs from far
Observed each other, and had markâd for war.
Near as they drew, Tydides thus began:

âWhat art thou, boldest of the race of man?
Our eyes till now that aspect neâer beheld,
Where fame is reapâd amid the embattled field;
Yet far before the troops thou darâst appear,
And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear.
Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires,
Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires!
But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend,
Know with immortals we no more contend.
Not long Lycurgus viewâd the golden light,
That daring man who mixâd with gods in fight.
Bacchus, and Bacchusâ votaries, he drove,
With brandishâd steel, from Nyssaâs sacred grove:
Their consecrated spears lay scatterâd round,
With curling vines and twisted ivy bound;
While Bacchus headlong sought the briny flood,
And Thetisâ arms received the trembling god.
Nor failâd the crime the immortalsâ wrath to move;
(The immortals blessâd with endless ease above;)
Deprived of sight by their avenging doom,
Cheerless he breathed, and wanderâd in the gloom,
Then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes,
A wretch accursed, and hated by the gods!
I brave not heaven: but if the fruits of earth
Sustain thy life, and human be thy birth,
Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath,
Approach, and enter the dark gates of death.â

âWhat, or from whence I am, or who my sire,
(Replied the chief,) can Tydeusâ son inquire?
Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground;
Another race the following spring supplies;
They fall successive, and successive rise:
So generations in their course decay;
So flourish these, when those are passâd away.
But if thou still persist to search my birth,
Then hear a tale that fills the spacious earth.

âA city stands on Argosâ utmost bound,
(Argos the fair, for warlike steeds renownâd,)
Ãolian Sisyphus, with wisdom blessâd,
In ancient time the happy wall possessâd,
Then callâd Ephyre: Glaucus was his son;
Great Glaucus, father of Bellerophon,
Who oâer the sons of men in beauty shined,
Loved for that valour which preserves mankind.
Then mighty Praetus Argosâ sceptre swayâd,
Whose hard commands Bellerophon obeyâd.
With direful jealousy the monarch raged,
And the brave prince in numerous toils engaged.
For him Antaea burnâd with lawless flame,
And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame:
In vain she tempted the relentless youth,
Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth.
Fired at his scorn the queen to Praetus fled,
And beggâd revenge for her insulted bed:
Incensed he heard, resolving on his fate;
But hospitable laws restrainâd his hate:
To Lycia the devoted youth he sent,
With tablets sealâd, that told his dire intent.[168]
Now blessâd by every power who guards the good,
The chief arrived at Xanthusâ silver flood:
There Lyciaâs monarch paid him honours due,
Nine days he feasted, and nine bulls he slew.
But when the tenth bright morning orient glowâd,
The faithful youth his monarchâs mandate showâd:
The fatal tablets, till that instant sealâd,
The deathful secret to the king revealâd.
First, dire Chimaeraâs conquest was enjoinâd;
A mingled monster of no mortal kind!
Behind, a dragonâs fiery tail was spread;
A goatâs rough body bore a lionâs head;
Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire;
Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.

âThis pest he slaughterâd, (for he read the skies,
And trusted heavenâs informing prodigies,)
Then met in arms the SolymÃ¦an crew,[169]
(Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew;
Next the bold Amazonsâ whole force defied;
And conquerâd still, for heaven was on his side.

âNor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes,
At his return, a treacherous ambush rose,
With levellâd spears along the winding shore:
There fell they breathless, and returnâd no more.

âAt length the monarch, with repentant grief,
Confessâd the gods, and god-descended chief;
His daughter gave, the stranger to detain,
With half the honours of his ample reign:
The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground,
With woods, with vineyards, and with harvests crownâd.
There long the chief his happy lot possessâd,
With two brave sons and one fair daughter blessâd;
(Fair eâen in heavenly eyes: her fruitful love
Crownâd with Sarpedonâs birth the embrace of Jove;)
But when at last, distracted in his mind,
Forsook by heaven, forsaking humankind,
Wide oâer the Aleian field he chose to stray,
A long, forlorn, uncomfortable way![170]
Woes heapâd on woes consumed his wasted heart:
His beauteous daughter fell by Phoebeâs dart;
His eldest born by raging Mars was slain,
In combat on the Solymaean plain.
Hippolochus survived: from him I came,
The honourâd author of my birth and name;
By his decree I sought the Trojan town;
By his instructions learn to win renown,
To stand the first in worth as in command,
To add new honours to my native land,
Before my eyes my mighty sires to place,
And emulate the glories of our race.â

He spoke, and transport fillâd Tydidesâ heart;
In earth the generous warrior fixâd his dart,
Then friendly, thus the Lycian prince addressâd:
âWelcome, my brave hereditary guest!
Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace,
Nor stain the sacred friendship of our race.
Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of old;
OEneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold:
Our ancient seat his honourâd presence graced,
Where twenty days in genial rites he passâd.
The parting heroes mutual presents left;
A golden goblet was thy grandsireâs gift;
OEneus a belt of matchless work bestowed,
That rich with Tyrian dye refulgent glowâd.
(This from his pledge I learnâd, which, safely stored
Among my treasures, still adorns my board:
For Tydeus left me young, when Thebeâs wall
Beheld the sons of Greece untimely fall.)
Mindful of this, in friendship let us join;
If heaven our steps to foreign lands incline,
My guest in Argos thou, and I in Lycia thine.
Enough of Trojans to this lance shall yield,
In the full harvest of yon ample field;
Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;
But thou and Diomed be foes no more.
Now change we arms, and prove to either host
We guard the friendship of the line we boast.â

Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,
Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight;
Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resignâd,
(Jove warmâd his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)
For Diomedâs brass arms, of mean device,
For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)
He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,[171]
A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.

Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state,
Great Hector, enterâd at the ScÃ¦an gate.[172]
Beneath the beech-treeâs consecrated shades,
The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids
Around him flockâd, all pressâd with pious care
For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war.
He bids the train in long procession go,
And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe.
And now to Priamâs stately courts he came,
Raisâd on archâd columns of stupendous frame;
Oâer these a range of marble structure runs,
The rich pavilions of his fifty sons,
In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,[173]
Opposed to those, where Priamâs daughters sate.
Twelve domes for them and their loved spouses shone,
Of equal beauty, and of polishâd stone.
Hither great Hector passâd, nor passâd unseen
Of royal Hecuba, his mother-queen.
(With her Laodice, whose beauteous face
Surpassâd the nymphs of Troyâs illustrious race.)
Long in a strict embrace she held her son,
And pressâd his hand, and tender thus begun:

âO Hector! say, what great occasion calls
My son from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls;
Comâst thou to supplicate the almighty power
With lifted hands, from Ilionâs lofty tower?
Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crownâd,
In Joveâs high name, to sprinkle on the ground,
And pay due vows to all the gods around.
Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy soul,
And draw new spirits from the generous bowl;
Spent as thou art with long laborious fight,
The brave defender of thy countryâs right.â

âFar hence be Bacchusâ gifts; (the chief rejoinâd;)
Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind,
Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind.
Let chiefs abstain, and spare the sacred juice
To sprinkle to the gods, its better use.
By me that holy office were profaned;
Ill fits it me, with human gore distainâd,
To the pure skies these horrid hands to raise,
Or offer heavenâs great Sire polluted praise.
You, with your matrons, go! a spotless train,
And burn rich odours in Minervaâs fane.
The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold,
Most prized for art, and labourâd oâer with gold,
Before the goddessâ honourâd knees be spread,
And twelve young heifers to her altar led.
So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
Our wives, our infants, and our city spare;
And far avert Tydidesâ wasteful ire,
Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.
Be this, O mother, your religious care:
I go to rouse soft Paris to the war;
If yet not lost to all the sense of shame,
The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.
Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace,
That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race![174]
Deep to the dark abyss might he descend,
Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end.â

This heard, she gave command: and summonâd came
Each noble matron and illustrious dame.
The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went,
Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
There lay the vestures of no vulgar art,
Sidonian maids embroiderâd every part,
Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore,
With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore.
Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes
The various textures and the various dyes,
She chose a veil that shone superior far,
And glowâd refulgent as the morning star.
Herself with this the long procession leads;
The train majestically slow proceeds.
Soon as to Ilionâs topmost tower they come,
And awful reach the high Palladian dome,
Antenorâs consort, fair Theano, waits
As Pallasâ priestess, and unbars the gates.
With hands uplifted and imploring eyes,
They fill the dome with supplicating cries.
The priestess then the shining veil displays,
Placed on Minervaâs knees, and thus she prays:

âOh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid,
Troyâs strong defence, unconquerâd Pallas, aid!
Break thou Tydidesâ spear, and let him fall
Prone on the dust before the Trojan wall!
So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke,
Shall fill thy temple with a grateful smoke.
But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer,
Ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!â
So prayâd the priestess in her holy fane;
So vowâd the matrons, but they vowâd in vain.

While these appear before the power with prayers,
Hector to Parisâ lofty dome repairs.[175]
Himself the mansion raised, from every part
Assembling architects of matchless art.
Near Priamâs court and Hectorâs palace stands
The pompous structure, and the town commands.
A spear the hero bore of wondrous strength,
Of full ten cubits was the lanceâs length,
The steely point with golden ringlets joinâd,
Before him brandishâd, at each motion shined
Thus entering, in the glittering rooms he found
His brother-chief, whose useless arms lay round,
His eyes delighting with their splendid show,
Brightening the shield, and polishing the bow.
Beside him Helen with her virgins stands,
Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.

Him thus inactive, with an ardent look
The prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke.
âThy hate to Troy, is this the time to show?
(O wretch ill-fated, and thy countryâs foe!)
Paris and Greece against us both conspire,
Thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire.
For thee great Ilionâs guardian heroes fall,
Till heaps of dead alone defend her wall,
For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns,
And wasteful war in all its fury burns.
Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care,
Our troops to hearten, and our toils to share?
Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend,
And all the Phrygian glories at an end.â

âBrother, âtis just, (replied the beauteous youth,)
Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth:
Yet charge my absence less, O generous chief!
On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief:
Here, hid from human eyes, thy brother sate,
And mournâd, in secret, his and Ilionâs fate.
âTis now enough; now glory spreads her charms,
And beauteous Helen calls her chief to arms.
Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless,
âTis manâs to fight, but heavenâs to give success.
But while I arm, contain thy ardent mind;
Or go, and Paris shall not lag behind.â


[Illustration: ] HECTOR CHIDING PARIS


He said, nor answerâd Priamâs warlike son;
When Helen thus with lowly grace begun:

âOh, generous brother! (if the guilty dame
That caused these woes deserve a sisterâs name!)
Would heaven, ere all these dreadful deeds were done,
The day that showâd me to the golden sun
Had seen my death! why did not whirlwinds bear
The fatal infant to the fowls of air?
Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide,
And midst the roarings of the waters died?
Heaven fillâd up all my ills, and I accursed
Bore all, and Paris of those ills the worst.
Helen at least a braver spouse might claim,
Warmâd with some virtue, some regard of fame!
Now tired with toils, thy fainting limbs recline,
With toils, sustainâd for Parisâ sake and mine
The gods have linkâd our miserable doom,
Our present woe, and infamy to come:
Wide shall it spread, and last through ages long,
Example sad! and theme of future song.â

The chief replied: âThis time forbids to rest;
The Trojan bands, by hostile fury pressâd,
Demand their Hector, and his arm require;
The combat urges, and my soulâs on fire.
Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls,
And timely join me, ere I leave the walls.
Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray,
My wife, my infant, claim a momentâs stay;
This day (perhaps the last that sees me here)
Demands a parting word, a tender tear:
This day, some god who hates our Trojan land
May vanquish Hector by a Grecian hand.â

He said, and passâd with sad presaging heart
To seek his spouse, his soulâs far dearer part;
At home he sought her, but he sought in vain;
She, with one maid of all her menial train,
Had hence retired; and with her second joy,
The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
Pensive she stood on Ilionâs towery height,
Beheld the war, and sickenâd at the sight;
There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.

But he who found not whom his soul desired,
Whose virtue charmâd him as her beauty fired,
Stood in the gates, and askâd âwhat way she bent
Her parting step? If to the fane she went,
Where late the mourning matrons made resort;
Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?â
âNot to the court, (replied the attendant train,)
Nor mixâd with matrons to Minervaâs fane:
To Ilionâs steepy tower she bent her way,
To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword;
She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:
Distracted with surprise, she seemâd to fly,
Fear on her cheek, and sorrow in her eye.
The nurse attended with her infant boy,
The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy.â

Hector this heard, returnâd without delay;
Swift through the town he trod his former way,
Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;
And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
His blameless wife, AÃ«tionâs wealthy heir
(Cilician Thebe great AÃ«tion swayâd,
And Hippoplacusâ wide extended shade):
The nurse stood near, in whose embraces pressâd,
His only hope hung smiling at her breast,
Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn.
To this loved infant Hector gave the name
Scamandrius, from Scamanderâs honourâd stream;
Astyanax the Trojans callâd the boy,
From his great father, the defence of Troy.
Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resignâd
To tender passions all his mighty mind;
His beauteous princess cast a mournful look,
Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;
Her bosom laboured with a boding sigh,
And the big tear stood trembling in her eye.


[Illustration: ] THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE


âToo daring prince! ah, whither dost thou run?
Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!
And thinkâst thou not how wretched we shall be,
A widow I, a helpless orphan he?
For sure such courage length of life denies,
And thou must fall, thy virtueâs sacrifice.
Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain.
O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom,
All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
And end with sorrows as they first begun.
No parent now remains my griefs to share,
No fatherâs aid, no motherâs tender care.
The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,
Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
His fate compassion in the victor bred;
Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead,
His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
And laid him decent on the funeral pile;
Then raised a mountain where his bones were burnâd,
The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adornâd,
Joveâs sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow
A barren shade, and in his honour grow.

âBy the same arm my seven brave brothers fell;
In one sad day beheld the gates of hell;
While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,
Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled!
My mother lived to wear the victorâs bands,
The queen of Hippoplaciaâs sylvan lands:
Redeemâd too late, she scarce beheld again
Her pleasing empire and her native plain,
When ah! oppressâd by life-consuming woe,
She fell a victim to Dianaâs bow.

âYet while my Hector still survives, I see
My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee:
Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all
Once more will perish, if my Hector fall,
Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share:
Oh, prove a husbandâs and a fatherâs care!
That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy,
Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy;
Thou, from this tower defend the important post;
There Agamemnon points his dreadful host,
That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain,
And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
Let others in the field their arms employ,
But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy.â

The chief replied: âThat post shall be my care,
Not that alone, but all the works of war.
How would the sons of Troy, in arms renownâd,
And Troyâs proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground
Attaint the lustre of my former name,
Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?
My early youth was bred to martial pains,
My soul impels me to the embattled plains!
Let me be foremost to defend the throne,
And guard my fatherâs glories, and my own.

âYet come it will, the day decreed by fates!
(How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!)
The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,
And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
My motherâs death, the ruin of my kind,
Not Priamâs hoary hairs defiled with gore,
Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread:
I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
In Argive looms our battles to design,
And woes, of which so large a part was thine!
To bear the victorâs hard commands, or bring
The weight of waters from Hyperiaâs spring.
There while you groan beneath the load of life,
They cry, âBehold the mighty Hectorâs wife!â
Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me.
The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!
May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
Pressâd with a load of monumental clay!
Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,
Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep.â

Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy
Stretchâd his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
The babe clung crying to his nurseâs breast,
Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest.
With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
And Hector hasted to relieve his child,
The glittering terrors from his brows unbound,
And placed the beaming helmet on the ground;
Then kissâd the child, and, lifting high in air,
Thus to the gods preferrâd a fatherâs prayer:

âO thou! whose glory fills the ethereal throne,
And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
Against his countryâs foes the war to wage,
And rise the Hector of the future age!
So when triumphant from successful toils
Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
And say, âThis chief transcends his fatherâs fame:â
While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
His motherâs conscious heart oâerflows with joy.â

He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
Hushâd to repose, and with a smile surveyâd.
The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
She mingled with a smile a tender tear.
The softenâd chief with kind compassion viewâd,
And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:

âAndromache! my soulâs far better part,
Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
Fixâd is the term to all the race of earth;
And such the hard condition of our birth:
No force can then resist, no flight can save,
All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
No moreâbut hasten to thy tasks at home,
There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
Me glory summons to the martial scene,
The field of combat is the sphere for men.
Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
The first in danger as the first in fame.â

Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye
That streamâd at every look; then, moving slow,
Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
Through all her train the soft infection ran;
The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.

But now, no longer deaf to honourâs call,
Forth issues Paris from the palace wall.
In brazen arms that cast a gleamy ray,
Swift through the town the warrior bends his way.
The wanton courser thus with reins unbound[176]
Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground;
Pamperâd and proud, he seeks the wonted tides,
And laves, in height of blood his shining sides;
His head now freed, he tosses to the skies;
His mane dishevellâd oâer his shoulders flies;
He snuffs the females in the distant plain,
And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay,
In arms refulgent as the god of day,
The son of Priam, glorying in his might,
Rushâd forth with Hector to the fields of fight.

And now, the warriors passing on the way,
The graceful Paris first excused his stay.
To whom the noble Hector thus replied:
âO chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied!
Thy power in war with justice none contest;
Known is thy courage, and thy strength confessâd.
What pity sloth should seize a soul so brave,
Or godlike Paris live a womanâs slave!
My heart weeps blood at what the Trojans say,
And hopes thy deeds shall wipe the stain away.
Haste then, in all their glorious labours share,
For much they suffer, for thy sake, in war.
These ills shall cease, wheneâer by Joveâs decree
We crown the bowl to heaven and liberty:
While the proud foe his frustrate triumphs mourns,
And Greece indignant through her seas returns.â


[Illustration: ] BOWS AND BOW CASE


[Illustration: ] IRIS




BOOK VII.


ARGUMENT


THE SINGLE COMBAT OF HECTOR AND AJAX.


The battle renewing with double ardour upon the return of Hector,
Minerva is under apprehensions for the Greeks. Apollo, seeing her
descend from Olympus, joins her near the Scaean gate. They agree to put
off the general engagement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge
the Greeks to a single combat. Nine of the princes accepting the
challenge, the lot is cast and falls upon Ajax. These heroes, after
several attacks, are parted by the night. The Trojans calling a
council, Antenor purposes the delivery of Helen to the Greeks, to which
Paris will not consent, but offers to restore them her riches. Priam
sends a herald to make this offer, and to demand a truce for burning
the dead, the last of which only is agreed to by Agamemnon. When the
funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the advice of Nestor,
erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp, flanked with
towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune testifies his
jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from Jupiter. Both
armies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens the Trojans
with thunder, and other signs of his wrath.
    The three and twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax,
    the next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up in the
    funeral rites of the slain and one more in building the
    fortification before the ships. So that somewhat about three days
    is employed in this book. The scene lies wholly in the field.


So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state,
Then rushâd impetuous through the Scaean gate.
Him Paris followâd to the dire alarms;
Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
As when to sailors labouring through the main,
That long have heaved the weary oar in vain,
Jove bids at length the expected gales arise;
The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies.
So welcome these to Troyâs desiring train,
The bands are cheerâd, the war awakes again.

Bold Paris first the work of death begun
On great Menestheus, Areithousâ son,
Sprung from the fair Philomedaâs embrace,
The pleasing Arne was his native place.
Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below,
Beneath his steely casque[177] he felt the blow
Full on his neck, from Hectorâs weighty hand;
And rollâd, with limbs relaxâd, along the land.
By Glaucusâ spear the bold Iphinous bleeds,
Fixâd in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
Headlong he tumbles: his slack nerves unbound,
Drop the cold useless members on the ground.

When now Minerva saw her Argives slain,
From vast Olympus to the gleaming plain
Fierce she descends: Apollo marked her flight,
Nor shot less swift from Ilionâs towery height.
Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade;
When thus Apollo to the blue-eyed maid:

âWhat cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove!
Thus wings thy progress from the realms above?
Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way,
To give to Greece the long divided day?
Too much has Troy already felt thy hate,
Now breathe thy rage, and hush the stern debate;
This day, the business of the field suspend;
War soon shall kindle, and great Ilion bend;
Since vengeful goddesses confederate join
To raze her walls, though built by hands divine.â

To whom the progeny of Jove replies:
âI left, for this, the council of the skies:
But who shall bid conflicting hosts forbear,
What art shall calm the furious sons of war?â
To her the god: âGreat Hectorâs soul incite
To dare the boldest Greek to single fight,
Till Greece, provoked, from all her numbers show
A warrior worthy to be Hectorâs foe.â

At this agreed, the heavenly powers withdrew;
Sage Helenus their secret counsels knew;
Hector, inspired, he sought: to him addressâd,
Thus told the dictates of his sacred breast:
âO son of Priam! let thy faithful ear
Receive my words: thy friend and brother hear!
Go forth persuasive, and a while engage
The warring nations to suspend their rage;
Then dare the boldest of the hostile train
To mortal combat on the listed plain.
For not this day shall end thy glorious date;
The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate.â

He said: the warrior heard the word with joy;
Then with his spear restrainâd the youth of Troy,
Held by the midst athwart. On either hand
The squadrons part; the expecting Trojans stand;
Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear:
They breathe, and hush the tumult of the war.
The Athenian maid,[178] and glorious god of day,
With silent joy the settling hosts survey:
In form of vultures, on the beechâs height
They sit concealâd, and wait the future fight.

The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields,
Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.
As when a general darkness veils the main,
(Soft Zephyr curling the wide watâry plain,)
The waves scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps,
And a still horror saddens all the deeps;
Thus in thick orders settling wide around,
At length composed they sit, and shade the ground.
Great Hector first amidst both armies broke
The solemn silence, and their powers bespoke:

âHear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
What my soul prompts, and what some god commands.
Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose,
Oâerwhelms the nations with new toils and woes;
War with a fiercer tide once more returns,
Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.
You then, O princes of the Greeks! appear;
âTis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear:
From all your troops select the boldest knight,
And him, the boldest, Hector dares to fight.
Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain,
Be his my spoil, and his these arms remain;
But let my body, to my friends returnâd,
By Trojan hands and Trojan flames be burnâd.
And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust,
Shall stretch your daring champion in the dust;
If mine the glory to despoil the foe;
On PhÅbusâ temple Iâll his arms bestow:
The breathless carcase to your navy sent,
Greece on the shore shall raise a monument;
Which when some future mariner surveys,
Washâd by broad Hellespontâs resounding seas,
Thus shall he say, âA valiant Greek lies there,
By Hector slain, the mighty man of war,â
The stone shall tell your vanquishâd heroâs name
And distant ages learn the victorâs fame.â

This fierce defiance Greece astonishâd heard,
Blushâd to refuse, and to accept it fearâd.
Stern Menelaus first the silence broke,
And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke:

âWomen of Greece! O scandal of your race,
Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace,
How great the shame, when every age shall know
That not a Grecian met this noble foe!
Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew,
A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
Be what ye seem, unanimated clay,
Myself will dare the danger of the day;
âTis manâs bold task the generous strife to try,
But in the hands of God is victory.â

These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour pressâd,
His manly limbs in azure arms he dressâd.
That day, Atrides! a superior hand
Had stretchâd thee breathless on the hostile strand;
But all at once, thy fury to compose,
The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose;
Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, pressâd
Thy daring hand, and this advice addressâd:
âWhither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run,
And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design;
Great Hectorâs arm is mightier far than thine:
Even fierce Achilles learnâd its force to fear,
And trembling met this dreadful son of war.
Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band;
Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand.
The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name,
Though bold and burning with desire of fame,
Content the doubtful honour might forego,
So great the danger, and so brave the foe.â

He said, and turnâd his brotherâs vengeful mind;
He stoopâd to reason, and his rage resignâd,
No longer bent to rush on certain harms;
His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.

He from whose lips divine persuasion flows,
Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;
Thus to the kings he spoke: âWhat grief, what shame
Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!
How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn
Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
What tears shall down thy silvery beard be rollâd,
O Peleus, old in arms, in wisdom old!
Once with what joy the generous prince would hear
Of every chief who fought this glorious war,
Participate their fame, and pleased inquire
Each name, each action, and each heroâs sire!
Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand,
And trembling all before one hostile hand;
How would he lift his aged arms on high,
Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!
Oh! would to all the immortal powers above,
Minerva, PhÅbus, and almighty Jove!
Years might again roll back, my youth renew,
And give this arm the spring which once it knew
When fierce in war, where Jardanâs waters fall,
I led my troops to Pheaâs trembling wall,
And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried,
Where Celadon rolls down his rapid tide.[179]
There Ereuthalion braved us in the field,
Proud Areithousâ dreadful arms to wield;
Great Areithous, known from shore to shore
By the huge, knotted, iron mace he bore;
No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow,
But broke, with this, the battle of the foe.
Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew,
Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew,
Deep in a winding way his breast assailed,
Nor aught the warriorâs thundering mace availâd.
Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before
Had given the vanquishâd, now the victor bore:
But when old age had dimmâd Lycurgusâ eyes,
To Ereuthalion he consignâd the prize.
Furious with this he crushâd our levellâd bands,
And dared the trial of the strongest hands;
Nor could the strongest hands his fury stay:
All saw, and fearâd, his huge tempestuous sway
Till I, the youngest of the host, appearâd,
And, youngest, met whom all our army fearâd.
I fought the chief: my arms Minerva crownâd:
Prone fell the giant oâer a length of ground.
What then I was, O were your Nestor now!
Not Hectorâs self should want an equal foe.
But, warriors, you that youthful vigour boast,
The flower of Greece, the examples of our host,
Sprung from such fathers, who such numbers sway,
Can you stand trembling, and desert the day?â

His warm reproofs the listening kings inflame;
And nine, the noblest of the Grecian name,
Up-started fierce: but far before the rest
The king of men advanced his dauntless breast:
Then bold Tydides, great in arms, appearâd;
And next his bulk gigantic Ajax rearâd;
OÃ¯leus followâd; Idomen was there,[180]
And Merion, dreadful as the god of war:
With these Eurypylus and Thoas stand,
And wise Ulysses closed the daring band.
All these, alike inspired with noble rage,
Demand the fight. To whom the Pylian sage:

âLest thirst of glory your brave souls divide,
What chief shall combat, let the gods decide.
Whom heaven shall choose, be his the chance to raise
His countryâs fame, his own immortal praise.â

The lots produced, each hero signs his own:
Then in the generalâs helm the fates are thrown,[181]
The people pray, with lifted eyes and hands,
And vows like these ascend from all the bands:
âGrant, thou Almighty! in whose hand is fate,
A worthy champion for the Grecian state:
This task let Ajax or Tydides prove,
Or he, the king of kings, beloved by Jove.â
Old Nestor shook the casque. By heaven inspired,
Leapâd forth the lot, of every Greek desired.
This from the right to left the herald bears,
Held out in order to the Grecian peers;
Each to his rival yields the mark unknown,
Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own;
Surveys the inscription with rejoicing eyes,
Then casts before him, and with transport cries:

âWarriors! I claim the lot, and arm with joy;
Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy.
Now while my brightest arms my limbs invest,
To Saturnâs son be all your vows addressâd:
But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear,
And deem your prayers the mean effect of fear.
Said I in secret? No, your vows declare
In such a voice as fills the earth and air,
Lives there a chief whom Ajax ought to dread?
Ajax, in all the toils of battle bred!
From warlike Salamis I drew my birth,
And, born to combats, fear no force on earth.â

He said. The troops with elevated eyes,
Implore the god whose thunder rends the skies:
âO father of mankind, superior lord!
On lofty Idaâs holy hill adored:
Who in the highest heaven hast fixâd thy throne,
Supreme of gods! unbounded and alone:
Grant thou, that Telamon may bear away
The praise and conquest of this doubtful day;
Or, if illustrious Hector be thy care,
That both may claim it, and that both may share.â

Now Ajax braced his dazzling armour on;
Sheathed in bright steel the giant-warrior shone:
He moves to combat with majestic pace;
So stalks in arms the grisly god of Thrace,[182]
When Jove to punish faithless men prepares,
And gives whole nations to the waste of wars,
Thus marchâd the chief, tremendous as a god;
Grimly he smiled; earth trembled as he strode:[183]
His massy javelin quivering in his hand,
He stood, the bulwark of the Grecian band.
Through every Argive heart new transport ran;
All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man:
Even Hector paused; and with new doubt oppressâd,
Felt his great heart suspended in his breast:
âTwas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear;
Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.

Stern Telamon behind his ample shield,
As from a brazen tower, oâerlookâd the field.
Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds oâercast,
Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last,
(The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwellâd
And in all arts of armoury excellâd,)
This Ajax bore before his manly breast,
And, threatening, thus his adverse chief addressâd:

âHector! approach my arm, and singly know
What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are,
Not void of soul, and not unskillâd in war:
Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore,
Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;
Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
And sends thee one, a sample of her host,
Such as I am, I come to prove thy might;
No moreâbe sudden, and begin the fight.â

âO son of Telamon, thy countryâs pride!
(To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)
Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,
New to the field, and trembling at the fight?
Thou meetâst a chief deserving of thy arms,
To combat born, and bred amidst alarms:
I know to shift my ground, remount the car,
Turn, charge, and answer every call of war;
To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,
And bear thick battle on my sounding shield/
But open be our fight, and bold each blow;
I steal no conquest from a noble foe.â

He said, and rising, high above the field
Whirlâd the long lance against the sevenfold shield.
Full on the brass descending from above
Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,
Till in the seventh it fixâd. Then Ajax threw;
Through Hectorâs shield the forceful javelin flew,
His corslet enters, and his garment rends,
And glancing downwards, near his flank descends.
The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low
Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins drew,
Then close impetuous, and the charge renew;
Fierce as the mountain-lions bathed in blood,
Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.
At Ajax, Hector his long lance extends;
The blunted point against the buckler bends;
But Ajax, watchful as his foe drew near,
Drove through the Trojan targe the knotty spear;
It reachâd his neck, with matchless strength impellâd!
Spouts the black gore, and dims his shining shield.
Yet ceased not Hector thus; but stooping down,
In his strong hand up-heaved a flinty stone,
Black, craggy, vast: to this his force he bends;
Full on the brazen boss the stone descends;
The hollow brass resounded with the shock:
Then Ajax seized the fragment of a rock,
Applied each nerve, and swinging round on high,
With force tempestuous, let the ruin fly;
The huge stone thundering through his buckler broke:
His slackenâd knees received the numbing stroke;
Great Hector falls extended on the field,
His bulk supporting on the shatterâd shield:
Nor wanted heavenly aid: Apolloâs might
Confirmâd his sinews, and restored to fight.
And now both heroes their broad falchions drew
In flaming circles round their heads they flew;
But then by heraldsâ voice the word was given.
The sacred ministers of earth and heaven:
Divine Talthybius, whom the Greeks employ,
And sage Idaeus on the part of Troy,
Between the swords their peaceful sceptres rearâd;
And first Idaeusâ awful voice was heard:


[Illustration: ] HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS


âForbear, my sons! your further force to prove,
Both dear to men, and both beloved of Jove.
To either host your matchless worth is known,
Each sounds your praise, and war is all your own.
But now the Night extends her awful shade;
The goddess parts you; be the night obeyâd.â[184]

To whom great Ajax his high soul expressâd:
âO sage! to Hector be these words addressâd.
Let him, who first provoked our chiefs to fight,
Let him demand the sanction of the night;
If first he askâd it, I content obey,
And cease the strife when Hector shows the way.â

âO first of Greeks! (his noble foe rejoinâd)
Whom heaven adorns, superior to thy kind,
With strength of body, and with worth of mind!
Now martial law commands us to forbear;
Hereafter we shall meet in glorious war,
Some future day shall lengthen out the strife,
And let the gods decide of death or life!
Since, then, the night extends her gloomy shade,
And heaven enjoins it, be the night obeyâd.
Return, brave Ajax, to thy Grecian friends,
And joy the nations whom thy arm defends;
As I shall glad each chief, and Trojan wife,
Who wearies heaven with vows for Hectorâs life.
But let us, on this memorable day,
Exchange some gift: that Greece and Troy may say,
âNot hate, but glory, made these chiefs contend;
And each brave foe was in his soul a friend.ââ

With that, a sword with stars of silver graced,
The baldric studded, and the sheath enchased,
He gave the Greek. The generous Greek bestowâd
A radiant belt that rich with purple glowâd.
Then with majestic grace they quit the plain;
This seeks the Grecian, that the Phrygian train.

The Trojan bands returning Hector wait,
And hail with joy the Champion of their state;
Escaped great Ajax, they survey him round,
Alive, unarmâd, and vigorous from his wound;
To Troyâs high gates the godlike man they bear
Their present triumph, as their late despair.

But Ajax, glorying in his hardy deed,
The well-armâd Greeks to Agamemnon lead.
A steer for sacrifice the king designâd,
Of full five years, and of the nobler kind.
The victim falls; they strip the smoking hide,
The beast they quarter, and the joints divide;
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
The king himself (an honorary sign)
Before great Ajax placed the mighty chine.[185]
When now the rage of hunger was removed,
Nestor, in each persuasive art approved,
The sage whose counsels long had swayâd the rest,
In words like these his prudent thought expressâd:

âHow dear, O kings! this fatal day has cost,
What Greeks are perishâd! what a people lost!
What tides of blood have drenchâd Scamanderâs shore!
What crowds of heroes sunk to rise no more!
Then hear me, chief! nor let the morrowâs light
Awake thy squadrons to new toils of fight:
Some space at least permit the war to breathe,
While we to flames our slaughterâd friends bequeath,
From the red field their scatterâd bodies bear,
And nigh the fleet a funeral structure rear;
So decent urns their snowy bones may keep,
And pious children oâer their ashes weep.
Here, where on one promiscuous pile they blazed,
High oâer them all a general tomb be raised;
Next, to secure our camp and naval powers,
Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers;
From space to space be ample gates around,
For passing chariots; and a trench profound.
So Greece to combat shall in safety go,
Nor fear the fierce incursions of the foe.â
âTwas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved;
The sceptred kings of Greece his words approved.

Meanwhile, convened at Priamâs palace-gate,
The Trojan peers in nightly council sate;
A senate void of order, as of choice:
Their hearts were fearful, and confused their voice.
Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear:
âYe Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear!
âTis heaven the counsel of my breast inspires,
And I but move what every god requires:
Let Spartaâs treasures be this hour restored,
And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke,
Our impious battles the just gods provoke.
As this advice ye practise, or reject,
So hope success, or dread the dire effect.â

The senior spoke and sate. To whom replied
The graceful husband of the Spartan bride:
âCold counsels, Trojan, may become thy years
But sound ungrateful in a warriorâs ears:
Old man, if void of fallacy or art,
Thy words express the purpose of thy heart,
Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given;
But wisdom has its date, assignâd by heaven.
Then hear me, princes of the Trojan name!
Their treasures Iâll restore, but not the dame;
My treasures too, for peace, I will resign;
But be this bright possession ever mine.â

âTwas then, the growing discord to compose,
Slow from his seat the reverend Priam rose:
His godlike aspect deep attention drew:
He paused, and these pacific words ensue:

âYe Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar bands!
Now take refreshment as the hour demands;
Guard well the walls, relieve the watch of night.
Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.
Then shall our herald, to the Atrides sent,
Before their ships proclaim my sonâs intent.
Next let a truce be askâd, that Troy may burn
Her slaughterâd heroes, and their bones inurn;
That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!â

The monarch spoke: the warriors snatchâd with haste
(Each at his post in arms) a short repast.
Soon as the rosy morn had waked the day,
To the black ships Idaeus bent his way;
There, to the sons of Mars, in council found,
He raised his voice: the host stood listening round.

âYe sons of Atreus, and ye Greeks, give ear!
The words of Troy, and Troyâs great monarch, hear.
Pleased may ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers)
What Paris, author of the war, declares.
The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore
(Oh had he perishâd ere they touchâd our shore!)
He proffers injured Greece: with large increase
Of added Trojan wealth to buy the peace.
But to restore the beauteous bride again,
This Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain.
Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to burn
Our slaughterâd heroes, and their bones inurn.
That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!â

The Greeks gave ear, but none the silence broke;
At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke:
âOh, take not, friends! defrauded of your fame,
Their profferâd wealth, nor even the Spartan dame.
Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall,
And Troy already totters to her fall.â

The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name,
With general shouts returnâd him loud acclaim.
Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace:
âHerald! in him thou hearâst the voice of Greece
For what remains; let funeral flames be fed
With heroesâ corps: I war not with the dead:
Go search your slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain,
And gratify the manes of the slain.
Be witness, Jove, whose thunder rolls on high!â
He said, and rearâd his sceptre to the sky.

To sacred Troy, where all her princes lay
To wait the event, the herald bent his way.
He came, and standing in the midst, explainâd
The peace rejected, but the truce obtainâd.
Straight to their several cares the Trojans move,
Some search the plains, some fell the sounding grove:
Nor less the Greeks, descending on the shore,
Hewâd the green forests, and the bodies bore.
And now from forth the chambers of the main,
To shed his sacred light on earth again,
Arose the golden chariot of the day,
And tippâd the mountains with a purple ray.
In mingled throngs the Greek and Trojan train
Through heaps of carnage searchâd the mournful plain.
Scarce could the friend his slaughterâd friend explore,
With dust dishonourâd, and deformed with gore.
The wounds they washâd, their pious tears they shed,
And, laid along their cars, deplored the dead.
Sage Priam checkâd their grief: with silent haste
The bodies decent on the piles were placed:
With melting hearts the cold remains they burnâd,
And, sadly slow, to sacred Troy returnâd.
Nor less the Greeks their pious sorrows shed,
And decent on the pile dispose the dead;
The cold remains consume with equal care;
And slowly, sadly, to their fleet repair.
Now, ere the morn had streakâd with reddening light
The doubtful confines of the day and night,
About the dying flames the Greeks appearâd,
And round the pile a general tomb they rearâd.
Then, to secure the camp and naval powers,
They raised embattled walls with lofty towers:[186]
From space to space were ample gates around,
For passing chariots, and a trench profound
Of large extent; and deep in earth below,
Strong piles infixâd stood adverse to the foe.

So toilâd the Greeks: meanwhile the gods above,
In shining circle round their father Jove,
Amazed beheld the wondrous works of man:
Then he, whose trident shakes the earth, began:

âWhat mortals henceforth shall our power adore,
Our fanes frequent, our oracles implore,
If the proud Grecians thus successful boast
Their rising bulwarks on the sea-beat coast?
See the long walls extending to the main,
No god consulted, and no victim slain!
Their fame shall fill the worldâs remotest ends,
Wide as the morn her golden beam extends;
While old Laomedonâs divine abodes,
Those radiant structures raised by labouring gods,
Shall, razed and lost, in long oblivion sleep.â
Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep.

The almighty Thunderer with a frown replies,
That clouds the world, and blackens half the skies:
âStrong god of ocean! thou, whose rage can make
The solid earthâs eternal basis shake!
What cause of fear from mortal works could move[187]
The meanest subject of our realms above?
Whereâer the sunâs refulgent rays are cast,
Thy power is honourâd, and thy fame shall last.
But yon proud work no future age shall view,
No trace remain where once the glory grew.
The sappâd foundations by thy force shall fall,
And, whelmâd beneath the waves, drop the huge wall:
Vast drifts of sand shall change the former shore:
The ruin vanishâd, and the name no more.â

Thus they in heaven: while, oâer the Grecian train,
The rolling sun descending to the main
Beheld the finishâd work. Their bulls they slew;
Back from the tents the savoury vapour flew.
And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnosâ strands,
With Bacchusâ blessings cheered the generous bands.
Of fragrant wines the rich Eunaeus sent
A thousant measures to the royal tent.
(Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle of yore
To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,)
The rest they purchased at their proper cost,
And well the plenteous freight supplied the host:
Each, in exchange, proportionâd treasures gave;[188]
Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.
All night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers:
Those on the fields, and these within their towers.
But Jove averse the signs of wrath displayâd,
And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade:
Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all,
While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.
Each pourâd to Jove before the bowl was crownâd;
And large libations drenchâd the thirsty ground:
Then late, refreshâd with sleep from toils of fight,
Enjoyâd the balmy blessings of the night.


[Illustration: ] GREEK AMPHORAâWINE VESSELS




BOOK VIII.


ARGUMENT.


THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS.


Jupiter assembles a council of the deities, and threatens them with the
pains of Tartarus if they assist either side: Minerva only obtains of
him that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels. The armies join
battle: Jupiter on Mount Ida weighs in his balances the fates of both,
and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and lightnings. Nestor alone
continues in the field in great danger: Diomed relieves him; whose
exploits, and those of Hector, are excellently described. Juno
endeavours to animate Neptune to the assistance of the Greeks, but in
vain. The acts of Teucer, who is at length wounded by Hector, and
carried off. Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the Grecians, but are
restrained by Iris, sent from Jupiter. The night puts an end to the
battle. Hector continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven to
their fortifications before the ships,) and gives orders to keep the
watch all night in the camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking and
escaping by flight. They kindle fires through all the fields, and pass
the night under arms.
    The time of seven and twenty days is employed from the opening of
    the poem to the end of this book. The scene here (except of the
    celestial machines) lies in the field towards the seashore.


Aurora now, fair daughter of the dawn,
Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn;
When Jove convened the senate of the skies,
Where high Olympusâ cloudy tops arise,
The sire of gods his awful silence broke;
The heavens attentive trembled as he spoke:[189]

âCelestial states! immortal gods! give ear,
Hear our decree, and reverence what ye hear;
The fixâd decree which not all heaven can move;
Thou, fate! fulfil it! and, ye powers, approve!
What god but enters yon forbidden field,
Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield,
Back to the skies with shame he shall be driven,
Gashâd with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heaven;
Or far, oh far, from steep Olympus thrown,
Low in the dark Tartarean gulf shall groan,
With burning chains fixâd to the brazen floors,
And lockâd by hellâs inexorable doors;
As deep beneath the infernal centre hurlâd,[190]
As from that centre to the ethereal world.
Let him who tempts me, dread those dire abodes:
And know, the Almighty is the god of gods.
League all your forces, then, ye powers above,
Join all, and try the omnipotence of Jove.
Let down our golden everlasting chain[191]
Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and main
Strive all, of mortal and immortal birth,
To drag, by this, the Thunderer down to earth:
Ye strive in vain! if I but stretch this hand,
I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land;
I fix the chain to great Olympusâ height,
And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight!
For such I reign, unbounded and above;
And such are men, and gods, compared to Jove.â

The all-mighty spoke, nor durst the powers reply:
A reverend horror silenced all the sky;
Trembling they stood before their sovereignâs look;
At length his best-beloved, the power of wisdom, spoke:

âO first and greatest! God, by gods adored
We own thy might, our father and our lord!
But, ah! permit to pity human state:
If not to help, at least lament their fate.
From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
With arms unaiding mourn our Argives slain;
Yet grant my counsels still their breasts may move,
Or all must perish in the wrath of Jove.â

The cloud-compelling god her suit approved,
And smiled superior on his best beloved;
Then callâd his coursers, and his chariot took;
The stedfast firmament beneath them shook:
Rapt by the ethereal steeds the chariot rollâd;
Brass were their hoofs, their curling manes of gold:
Of heavenâs undrossy gold the gods array,
Refulgent, flashâd intolerable day.
High on the throne he shines: his coursers fly
Between the extended earth and starry sky.
But when to Idaâs topmost height he came,
(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game,)
Where oâer her pointed summits proudly raised,
His fane breathed odours, and his altar blazed:
There, from his radiant car, the sacred sire
Of gods and men released the steeds of fire:
Blue ambient mists the immortal steeds embraced;
High on the cloudy point his seat he placed;
Thence his broad eye the subject world surveys,
The town, and tents, and navigable seas.

Now had the Grecians snatchâd a short repast,
And buckled on their shining arms with haste.
Troy roused as soon; for on this dreadful day
The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train;
Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusky plain:
Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground,
The tumult thickens, and the skies resound;
And now with shouts the shocking armies closed,
To lances lances, shields to shields opposed,
Host against host with shadowy legends drew,
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;
Victors and vanquishâd join promiscuous cries,
Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise;
With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
And slaughterâd heroes swell the dreadful tide.
Long as the morning beams, increasing bright,
Oâer heavenâs clear azure spread the sacred light,
Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,[192]
With equal hand: in these explored the fate
Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight:
Pressâd with its load, the Grecian balance lies
Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.
Then Jove from Idaâs top his horrors spreads;
The clouds burst dreadful oâer the Grecian heads;
Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls;
Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls.
Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire;
The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire.
Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear,
Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war:
Nor he, the king of war, the alarm sustainâd
Nestor alone, amidst the storm remainâd.
Unwilling he remainâd, for Parisâ dart
Had pierced his courser in a mortal part;
Fixâd in the forehead, where the springing mane
Curlâd oâer the brow, it stung him to the brain;
Mad with his anguish, he begins to rear,
Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air.
Scarce had his falchion cut the reins, and freed
The encumberâd chariot from the dying steed,
When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war,
Pourâd to the tumult on his whirling car.
That day had stretchâd beneath his matchless hand
The hoary monarch of the Pylian band,
But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowd
He rushâd, and on Ulysses callâd aloud:

âWhither, oh whither does Ulysses run?
Oh, flight unworthy great Laertesâ son!
Mixâd with the vulgar shall thy fate be found,
Pierced in the back, a vile, dishonest wound?
Oh turn and save from Hectorâs direful rage
The glory of the Greeks, the Pylian sage.â
His fruitless words are lost unheard in air,
Ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there.
But bold Tydides to the rescue goes,
A single warrior midst a host of foes;
Before the coursers with a sudden spring
He leapâd, and anxious thus bespoke the king:

âGreat perils, father! wait the unequal fight;
These younger champions will oppress thy might.
Thy veins no more with ancient vigour glow,
Weak is thy servant, and thy coursers slow.
Then haste, ascend my seat, and from the car
Observe the steeds of Tros, renownâd in war.
Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
To dare the fight, or urge the rapid race:
These late obeyâd Ãneasâ guiding rein;
Leave thou thy chariot to our faithful train;
With these against yon Trojans will we go,
Nor shall great Hector want an equal foe;
Fierce as he is, even he may learn to fear
The thirsty fury of my flying spear.â

Thus said the chief; and Nestor, skillâd in war,
Approves his counsel, and ascends the car:
The steeds he left, their trusty servants hold;
Eurymedon, and Sthenelus the bold:
The reverend charioteer directs the course,
And strains his aged arm to lash the horse.
Hector they face; unknowing how to fear,
Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirlâd his spear.
The spear with erring haste mistook its way,
But plunged in Eniopeusâ bosom lay.
His opening hand in death forsakes the rein;
The steeds fly back: he falls, and spurns the plain.
Great Hector sorrows for his servant killâd,
Yet unrevenged permits to press the field;
Till, to supply his place and rule the car,
Rose Archeptolemus, the fierce in war.
And now had death and horror coverâd all;[193]
Like timorous flocks the Trojans in their wall
Inclosed had bled: but Jove with awful sound
Rollâd the big thunder oâer the vast profound:
Full in Tydidesâ face the lightning flew;
The ground before him flamed with sulphur blue;
The quivering steeds fell prostrate at the sight;
And Nestorâs trembling hand confessâd his fright:
He droppâd the reins: and, shook with sacred dread,
Thus, turning, warnâd the intrepid Diomed:

âO chief! too daring in thy friendâs defence
Retire advised, and urge the chariot hence.
This day, averse, the sovereign of the skies
Assists great Hector, and our palm denies.
Some other sun may see the happier hour,
When Greece shall conquer by his heavenly power.
âTis not in man his fixâd decree to move:
The great will glory to submit to Jove.â

âO reverend prince! (Tydides thus replies)
Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
But ah, what grief! should haughty Hector boast
I fled inglorious to the guarded coast.
Before that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
Oâerwhelm me, earth; and hide a warriorâs shame!â
To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:[194]
âGods! can thy courage fear the Phrygianâs pride?
Hector may vaunt, but who shall heed the boast?
Not those who felt thy arm, the Dardan host,
Nor Troy, yet bleeding in her heroes lost;
Not even a Phrygian dame, who dreads the sword
That laid in dust her loved, lamented lord.â
He said, and, hasty, oâer the gasping throng
Drives the swift steeds: the chariot smokes along;
The shouts of Trojans thicken in the wind;
The storm of hissing javelins pours behind.
Then with a voice that shakes the solid skies,
Pleased, Hector braves the warrior as he flies.
âGo, mighty hero! graced above the rest
In seats of council and the sumptuous feast:
Now hope no more those honours from thy train;
Go less than woman, in the form of man!
To scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames,
To lead in exile the fair Phrygian dames,
Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled;
This arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead.â

Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite.
To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight;
Thrice turnâd the chief, and thrice imperial Jove
On Idaâs summits thunderâd from above.
Great Hector heard; he saw the flashing light,
(The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight:

âHear, every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band,
All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand.
Be mindful of the wreaths your arms have won,
Your great forefathersâ glories, and your own.
Heard ye the voice of Jove? Success and fame
Await on Troy, on Greece eternal shame.
In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall,
Weak bulwarks; destined by this arm to fall.
High oâer their slighted trench our steeds shall bound,
And pass victorious oâer the levellâd mound.
Soon as before yon hollow ships we stand,
Fight each with flames, and toss the blazing brand;
Till, their proud navy wrapt in smoke and fires,
All Greece, encompassâd, in one blaze expires.â

Furious he said; then bending oâer the yoke,
Encouraged his proud steeds, while thus he spoke:

âNow, Xanthus, Ãthon, Lampus, urge the chase,
And thou, Podargus! prove thy generous race;
Be fleet, be fearless, this important day,
And all your masterâs well-spent care repay.
For this, high-fed, in plenteous stalls ye stand,
Served with pure wheat, and by a princessâ hand;
For this my spouse, of great AÃ«tionâs line,
So oft has steepâd the strengthening grain in wine.
Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontrollâd:
Give me to seize rich Nestorâs shield of gold;
From Tydeusâ shoulders strip the costly load,
Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god:
These if we gain, then victory, ye powers!
This night, this glorious night, the fleet is ours!â

That heard, deep anguish stung Saturniaâs soul;
She shook her throne, that shook the starry pole:
And thus to Neptune: âThou, whose force can make
The stedfast earth from her foundations shake,
Seest thou the Greeks by fates unjust oppressâd,
Nor swells thy heart in that immortal breast?
Yet Ãgae, Helice, thy power obey,[195]
And gifts unceasing on thine altars lay.
Would all the deities of Greece combine,
In vain the gloomy Thunderer might repine:
Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend,
And see his Trojans to the shades descend:
Such be the scene from his Idaean bower;
Ungrateful prospect to the sullen power!â

Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design:
âWhat rage, what madness, furious queen! is thine?
I war not with the highest. All above
Submit and tremble at the hand of Jove.â

Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless might
Jove gave the glory of the destined fight,
Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills the fields
With close-ranged chariots, and with thickenâd shields.
Where the deep trench in length extended lay,
Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array,
A dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threat
With long-destroying flames the hostile fleet.
The king of men, by Junoâs self inspired,
Toilâd through the tents, and all his army fired.
Swift as he moved, he lifted in his hand
His purple robe, bright ensign of command.
High on the midmost bark the king appearâd:
There, from Ulyssesâ deck, his voice was heard:
To Ajax and Achilles reachâd the sound,
Whose distant ships the guarded navy bound.
âO Argives! shame of human race! (he cried:
The hollow vessels to his voice replied,)
Where now are all your glorious boasts of yore,
Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore?
Each fearless hero dares a hundred foes,
While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows;
But who to meet one martial man is found,
When the fight rages, and the flames surround?
O mighty Jove! O sire of the distressâd!
Was ever king like me, like me oppressâd?
With power immense, with justice armâd in vain;
My glory ravishâd, and my people slain!
To thee my vows were breathed from every shore;
What altar smoked not with our victimsâ gore?
With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame,
And askâd destruction to the Trojan name.
Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand;
Give these at least to âscape from Hectorâs hand,
And save the relics of the Grecian land!â

Thus prayâd the king, and heavenâs great father heard
His vows, in bitterness of soul preferrâd:
The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares,
And gives the people to their monarchâs prayers.
His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he sent,
A fawn his talons trussâd, (divine portent!)
High oâer the wondering hosts he soarâd above,
Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove;
Then let the prey before his altar fall;
The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all:
Encouraged by the sign, the troops revive,
And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive.
Tydides first, of all the Grecian force,
Oâer the broad ditch impellâd his foaming horse,
Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore,
And dyed his javelin red with Trojan gore.
Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire)
With flying coursers shunnâd his dreadful ire;
Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell oppressâd;
The dart drove on, and issued at his breast:
Headlong he quits the car: his arms resound;
His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground.
Forth rush a tide of Greeks, the passage freed;
The Atridae first, the Ajaces next succeed:
Meriones, like Mars in arms renownâd,
And godlike Idomen, now passed the mound;
Evaemonâs son next issues to the foe,
And last young Teucer with his bended bow.
Secure behind the Telamonian shield
The skilful archer wide surveyâd the field,
With every shaft some hostile victim slew,
Then close beneath the sevenfold orb withdrew:
The conscious infant so, when fear alarms,
Retires for safety to the motherâs arms.
Thus Ajax guards his brother in the field,
Moves as he moves, and turns the shining shield.
Who first by Teucerâs mortal arrows bled?
Orsilochus; then fell Ormenus dead:
The godlike Lycophon next pressâd the plain,
With Chromius, Daetor, Ophelestes slain:
Bold Hamopaon breathless sunk to ground;
The bloody pile great Melanippus crownâd.
Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his art,
A Trojan ghost attending every dart.
Great Agamemnon views with joyful eye
The ranks grow thinner as his arrows fly:
âO youth forever dear! (the monarch cried)
Thus, always thus, thy early worth be tried;
Thy brave example shall retrieve our host,
Thy countryâs saviour, and thy fatherâs boast!
Sprung from an alienâs bed thy sire to grace,
The vigorous offspring of a stolen embrace:
Proud of his boy, he ownâd the generous flame,
And the brave son repays his cares with fame.
Now hear a monarchâs vow: If heavenâs high powers
Give me to raze Troyâs long-defended towers;
Whatever treasures Greece for me design,
The next rich honorary gift be thine:
Some golden tripod, or distinguished car,
With coursers dreadful in the ranks of war:
Or some fair captive, whom thy eyes approve,
Shall recompense the warriorâs toils with love.â

To this the chief: âWith praise the rest inspire,
Nor urge a soul already fillâd with fire.
What strength I have, be now in battle tried,
Till every shaft in Phrygian blood be dyed.
Since rallying from our wall we forced the foe,
Still aimâd at Hector have I bent my bow:
Eight forky arrows from this hand have fled,
And eight bold heroes by their points lie dead:
But sure some god denies me to destroy
This fury of the field, this dog of Troy.â

He said, and twangâd the string. The weapon flies
At Hectorâs breast, and sings along the skies:
He missâd the mark; but pierced Gorgythioâs heart,
And drenchâd in royal blood the thirsty dart.
(Fair Castianira, nymph of form divine,
This offspring added to king Priamâs line.)
As full-blown poppies, overcharged with rain,[196]
Decline the head, and drooping kiss the plain;
So sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depressâd
Beneath his helmet, drops upon his breast.
Another shaft the raging archer drew,
That other shaft with erring fury flew,
(From Hector, PhÅbus turnâd the flying wound,)
Yet fell not dry or guiltless to the ground:
Thy breast, brave Archeptolemus! it tore,
And dippâd its feathers in no vulgar gore.
Headlong he falls: his sudden fall alarms
The steeds, that startle at his sounding arms.
Hector with grief his charioteer beheld
All pale and breathless on the sanguine field:
Then bids Cebriones direct the rein,
Quits his bright car, and issues on the plain.
Dreadful he shouts: from earth a stone he took,
And rushâd on Teucer with the lifted rock.
The youth already strainâd the forceful yew;
The shaft already to his shoulder drew;
The feather in his hand, just wingâd for flight,
Touchâd where the neck and hollow chest unite;
There, where the juncture knits the channel bone,
The furious chief discharged the craggy stone:
The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow,
And his numbâd hand dismissâd his useless bow.
He fell: but Ajax his broad shield displayâd,
And screenâd his brother with the mighty shade;
Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus, bore
The batterâd archer groaning to the shore.

Troy yet found grace before the Olympian sire,
He armâd their hands, and fillâd their breasts with fire.
The Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall,
Or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall.
First of the foe, great Hector marchâd along,
With terror clothed, and more than mortal strong.
As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase,
With beating bosom, and with eager pace,
Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels,
Guards as he turns, and circles as he wheels;
Thus oft the Grecians turnâd, but still they flew;
Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew.
When flying they had passâd the trench profound,
And many a chief lay gasping on the ground;
Before the ships a desperate stand they made,
And fired the troops, and called the gods to aid.
Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came:
His eyes like Gorgon shot a sanguine flame
That witherâd all their host: like Mars he stood:
Dire as the monster, dreadful as the god!
Their strong distress the wife of Jove surveyâd;
Then pensive thus, to warâs triumphant maid:

âO daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield!
Now, in this moment of her last despair,
Shall wretched Greece no more confess our care,
Condemnâd to suffer the full force of fate,
And drain the dregs of heavenâs relentless hate?
Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all?
What numbers fell! what numbers yet shall fall!
What power divine shall Hectorâs wrath assuage?
Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!â

So spake the imperial regent of the skies;
To whom the goddess with the azure eyes:

âLong since had Hector stainâd these fields with gore,
Stretchâd by some Argive on his native shore:
But he above, the sire of heaven, withstands,
Mocks our attempts, and slights our just demands;
The stubborn god, inflexible and hard,
Forgets my service and deserved reward:
Saved I, for this, his favourite son distressâd,
By stern Eurystheus with long labours pressâd?
He beggâd, with tears he beggâd, in deep dismay;
I shot from heaven, and gave his arm the day.
Oh had my wisdom known this dire event,
When to grim Plutoâs gloomy gates he went;
The triple dog had never felt his chain,
Nor Styx been crossâd, nor hell explored in vain.
Averse to me of all his heaven of gods,
At Thetisâ suit the partial Thunderer nods;
To grace her gloomy, fierce, resenting son,
My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone.
Some future day, perhaps, he may be moved
To call his blue-eyed maid his best beloved.
Haste, launch thy chariot, through yon ranks to ride;
Myself will arm, and thunder at thy side.
Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then?
(That terror of the Greeks, that man of men)
When Junoâs self, and Pallas shall appear,
All dreadful in the crimson walks of war!
What mighty Trojan then, on yonder shore,
Expiring, pale, and terrible no more,
Shall feast the fowls, and glut the dogs with gore?â

She ceased, and Juno reinâd the steeds with care:
(Heavenâs awful empress, Saturnâs other heir:)
Pallas, meanwhile, her various veil unbound,
With flowers adornâd, with art immortal crownâd;
The radiant robe her sacred fingers wove
Floats in rich waves, and spreads the court of Jove.
Her fatherâs arms her mighty limbs invest,
His cuirass blazes on her ample breast.
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends:
Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends:
Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts oâerturns.

Saturnia lends the lash; the coursers fly;
Smooth glides the chariot through the liquid sky.
Heavenâs gates spontaneous open to the powers,
Heavenâs golden gates, kept by the winged Hours.
Commissionâd in alternate watch they stand,
The sunâs bright portals and the skies command;
Close, or unfold, the eternal gates of day
Bar heaven with clouds, or roll those clouds away.
The sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide.
Prone down the steep of heaven their course they guide.
But Jove, incensed, from Idaâs top surveyâd,
And thus enjoinâd the many-colourâd maid.


[Illustration: ] JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS


âThaumantia! mount the winds, and stop their car;
Against the highest who shall wage the war?
If furious yet they dare the vain debate,
Thus have I spoke, and what I speak is fate:
Their coursers crushâd beneath the wheels shall lie,
Their car in fragments, scatterâd oâer the sky:
My lightning these rebellious shall confound,
And hurl them flaming, headlong, to the ground,
Condemnâd for ten revolving years to weep
The wounds impressâd by burning thunder deep.
So shall Minerva learn to fear our ire,
Nor dare to combat hers and natureâs sire.
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
She claims some title to transgress our will.â

Swift as the wind, the various-colourâd maid
From Idaâs top her golden wings displayâd;
To great Olympusâ shining gate she flies,
There meets the chariot rushing down the skies,
Restrains their progress from the bright abodes,
And speaks the mandate of the sire of gods.

âWhat frenzy goddesses! what rage can move
Celestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove?
Desist, obedient to his high command:
This is his word; and know his word shall stand:
His lightning your rebellion shall confound,
And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground;
Your horses crushâd beneath the wheels shall lie,
Your car in fragments scatterâd oâer the sky;
Yourselves condemnâd ten rolling years to weep
The wounds impressâd by burning thunder deep.
So shall Minerva learn to fear his ire,
Nor dare to combat hers and natureâs sire.
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
She claims some title to transgress his will:
But thee, what desperate insolence has driven
To lift thy lance against the king of heaven?â

Then, mounting on the pinions of the wind,
She flew; and Juno thus her rage resignâd:

âO daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the saber shield!
No more let beings of superior birth
Contend with Jove for this low race of earth;
Triumphant now, now miserably slain,
They breathe or perish as the fates ordain:
But Joveâs high counsels full effect shall find;
And, ever constant, ever rule mankind.â

She spoke, and backward turnâd her steeds of light,
Adornâd with manes of gold, and heavenly bright.
The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood,
And heapâd their mangers with ambrosial food.
There tied, they rest in high celestial stalls;
The chariot proppâd against the crystal walls,
The pensive goddesses, abashâd, controllâd,
Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold.


[Illustration: ] THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNOâS CAR


And now the Thunderer meditates his flight
From Idaâs summits to the Olympian height.
Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly,
Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky.
âTwas Neptuneâs charge his coursers to unbrace,
And fix the car on its immortal base;
There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays,
Till with a snowy veil he screenâd the blaze.
He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,
The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,
And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes.
Trembling afar the offending powers appearâd,
Confused and silent, for his frown they fearâd.
He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts:
âPallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts?
Soon was your battle oâer: proud Troy retired
Before your face, and in your wrath expired.
But know, whoeâer almighty power withstand!
Unmatchâd our force, unconquerâd is our hand:
Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
Not all the gods that crown the starry pole.
Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take,
And each immortal nerve with horror shake.
For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;
What power soeâer provokes our lifted hand,
On this our hill no more shall hold his place;
Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race.â

Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom,
But feast their souls on Ilionâs woes to come.
Though secret anger swellâd Minervaâs breast,
The prudent goddess yet her wrath repressâd;
But Juno, impotent of rage, replies:
âWhat hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!
Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne;
âTis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.
For Greece we grieve, abandonâd by her fate
To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate.
From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
With arms unaiding see our Argives slain;
Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move,
Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove.â

The goddess thus; and thus the god replies,
Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies:

âThe morning sun, awaked by loud alarms,
Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms.
What heaps of Argives then shall load the plain,
Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain.
Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight,
The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight,
Even till the day when certain fates ordain
That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain)
Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.
For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its course
With all thy rage, with all thy rebel force.
Fly, if thy wilt, to earthâs remotest bound,
Where on her utmost verge the seas resound;
Where cursed Iapetus and Saturn dwell,
Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell;
No sun eâer gilds the gloomy horrors there;
No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air:
There arm once more the bold Titanian band;
And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand.â

Now deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light,
And drew behind the cloudy veil of night:
The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decayâd;
The Greeks rejoicing bless the friendly shade.

The victors keep the field; and Hector calls
A martial council near the navy walls;
These to Scamanderâs bank apart he led,
Where thinly scatterâd lay the heaps of dead.
The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground,
Attend his order, and their prince surround.
A massy spear he bore of mighty strength,
Of full ten cubits was the lanceâs length;
The point was brass, refulgent to behold,
Fixâd to the wood with circling rings of gold:
The noble Hector on his lance reclined,
And, bending forward, thus revealâd his mind:

âYe valiant Trojans, with attention hear!
Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame
Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame.
But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls,
And guards them trembling in their wooden walls.
Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours
Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.
Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought,
And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought.
Wide oâer the field, high blazing to the sky,
Let numerous fires the absent sun supply,
The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise,
Till the bright morn her purple beam displays;
Lest, in the silence and the shades of night,
Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight.
Not unmolested let the wretches gain
Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main;
Some hostile wound let every dart bestow,
Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe,
Wounds, that long hence may ask their spousesâ care.
And warn their children from a Trojan war.
Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall,
Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call;
To bid the sires with hoary honours crownâd,
And beardless youths, our battlements surround.
Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers,
And let the matrons hang with lights the towers;
Lest, under covert of the midnight shade,
The insidious foe the naked town invade.
Suffice, to-night, these orders to obey;
A nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day.
The gods, I trust, shall give to Hectorâs hand
From these detested foes to free the land,
Who ploughâd, with fates averse, the watery way:
For Trojan vultures a predestined prey.
Our common safety must be now the care;
But soon as morning paints the fields of air,
Sheathed in bright arms let every troop engage,
And the fired fleet behold the battle rage.
Then, then shall Hector and Tydides prove
Whose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove.
To-morrowâs light (O haste the glorious morn!)
Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne,
With this keen javelin shall his breast be gored,
And prostrate heroes bleed around their lord.
Certain as this, oh! might my days endure,
From age inglorious, and black death secure;
So might my life and glory know no bound,
Like Pallas worshippâd, like the sun renownâd!
As the next dawn, the last they shall enjoy,
Shall crush the Greeks, and end the woes of Troy.â

The leader spoke. From all his host around
Shouts of applause along the shores resound.
Each from the yoke the smoking steeds untied,
And fixâd their headstalls to his chariot-side.
Fat sheep and oxen from the town are led,
With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread,
Full hecatombs lay burning on the shore:
The winds to heaven the curling vapours bore.
Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers![197]
Whose wrath hung heavy oâer the Trojan towers:
Nor Priam nor his sons obtainâd their grace;
Proud Troy they hated, and her guilty race.

The troops exulting sat in order round,
And beaming fires illumined all the ground.
As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,[198]
Oâer heavenâs pure azure spreads her sacred light,
When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
And not a cloud oâercasts the solemn scene,
Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
And stars unnumberâd gild the glowing pole,
Oâer the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
And tip with silver every mountainâs head:
Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,
A flood of glory bursts from all the skies:
The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,
Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light.
So many flames before proud Ilion blaze,
And lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays.
The long reflections of the distant fires
Gleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires.
A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild,
And shoot a shady lustre oâer the field.
Full fifty guards each flaming pile attend,
Whose umberâd arms, by fits, thick flashes send,
Loud neigh the coursers oâer their heaps of corn,
And ardent warriors wait the rising morn.


[Illustration: ] THE SHIELD OF ACHILLES




BOOK IX.


ARGUMENT.


THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES.


Agamemnon, after the last dayâs defeat, proposes to the Greeks to quit
the siege, and return to their country. Diomed opposes this, and Nestor
seconds him, praising his wisdom and resolution. He orders the guard to
be strengthened, and a council summoned to deliberate what measures are
to be followed in this emergency. Agamemnon pursues this advice, and
Nestor further prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, in
order to move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice
of, who are accompanied by old PhÅnix. They make, each of them, very
moving and pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by
Achilles, who notwithstanding retains PhÅnix in his tent. The
ambassadors return unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake
themselves to sleep.
    This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night,
    which is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The
    scene lies on the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships.


Thus joyful Troy maintainâd the watch of night;
While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,[199]
And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part,
Sat on each face, and saddenâd every heart.
As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth,
A double tempest of the west and north
Swells oâer the sea, from Thraciaâs frozen shore,
Heaps waves on waves, and bids the Ãgean roar:
This way and that the boiling deeps are tossâd:
Such various passions urged the troubled host,
Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest;
Superior sorrows swellâd his royal breast;
Himself his orders to the heralds bears,
To bid to council all the Grecian peers,
But bid in whispers: these surround their chief,
In solemn sadness and majestic grief.
The king amidst the mournful circle rose:
Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
So silent fountains, from a rockâs tall head,
In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed.
With more than vulgar grief he stood oppressâd;
Words, mixâd with sighs, thus bursting from his breast:

âYe sons of Greece! partake your leaderâs care;
Fellows in arms and princes of the war!
Of partial Jove too justly we complain,
And heavenly oracles believed in vain.
A safe return was promised to our toils,
With conquest honourâd and enrichâd with spoils:
Now shameful flight alone can save the host;
Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost.
So Jove decrees, almighty lord of all!
Jove, at whose nod whole empires rise or fall,
Who shakes the feeble props of human trust,
And towers and armies humbles to the dust.
Haste then, for ever quit these fatal fields,
Haste to the joys our native country yields;
Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ,
Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.â

He said: deep silence held the Grecian band;
Silent, unmovâd in dire dismay they stand;
A pensive scene! till Tydeusâ warlike son
Rollâd on the king his eyes, and thus begun:
âWhen kings advise us to renounce our fame,
First let him speak who first has sufferâd shame.
If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold,
The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight,
Durst brand my courage, and defame my might:
Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appearâd,
The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard.
The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring,
The gods have made thee but by halves a king:
They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command;
They gave dominion oâer the seas and land;
The noblest power that might the world control
They gave thee notâa brave and virtuous soul.
Is this a generalâs voice, that would suggest
Fears like his own to every Grecian breast?
Confiding in our want of worth, he stands;
And if we fly, âtis what our king commands.
Go thou, inglorious! from the embattled plain;
Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the main;
A noble care the Grecians shall employ,
To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy.
Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire,
Myself shall stay, till Troy or I expire;
Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame;
God bade us fight, and âtwas with God we came.â

He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise,
And voice to voice resounds Tydidesâ praise.
Wise Nestor then his reverend figure rearâd;
He spoke: the host in still attention heard:[200]

âO truly great! in whom the gods have joinâd
Such strength of body with such force of mind:
In conduct, as in courage, you excel,
Still first to act what you advise so well.
These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves,
Applauding Greece with common voice approves.
Kings thou canst blame; a bold but prudent youth:
And blame even kings with praise, because with truth.
And yet those years that since thy birth have run
Would hardly style thee Nestorâs youngest son.
Then let me add what yet remains behind,
A thought unfinishâd in that generous mind;
Age bids me speak! nor shall the advice I bring
Distaste the people, or offend the king:

âCursed is the man, and void of law and right,
Unworthy property, unworthy light,
Unfit for public rule, or private care,
That wretch, that monster, who delights in war;
Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,
To tear his country, and his kind destroy!
This night, refresh and fortify thy train;
Between the trench and wall let guards remain:
Be that the duty of the young and bold;
But thou, O king, to council call the old;
Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares;
Thy high commands must spirit all our wars.
With Thracian wines recruit thy honourâd guests,
For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distressâd,
And such a monarch as can choose the best.
See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires,
How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!
Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
What eye beholds them, and can close to-night?
This dreadful interval determines all;
To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall.â

Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey;
Swift through the gates the guards direct their way.
His son was first to pass the lofty mound,
The generous Thrasymed, in arms renownâd:
Next him, Ascalaphus, Ialmen, stood,
The double offspring of the warrior-god:
Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,
And Lycomed of Creonâs noble line.
Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands,
And each bold chief a hundred spears commands.
The fires they light, to short repasts they fall,
Some line the trench, and others man the wall.

The king of men, on public counsels bent,
Convened the princes in his ample tent,
Each seized a portion of the kingly feast,
But stayâd his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.
Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved,
And slowly rising, thus the council moved.

âMonarch of nations! whose superior sway
Assembled states, and lords of earth obey,
The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given,
And millions own the care of thee and Heaven.
O king! the counsels of my age attend;
With thee my cares begin, with thee must end.
Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and hear,
Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear,
To see no wholesome motion be withstood,
And ratify the best for public good.
Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine,
But follow it, and make the wisdom thine.
Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste,
At once my present judgment and my past.
When from Pelidesâ tent you forced the maid,
I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;
But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired,
You wronged the man, by men and gods admired:
Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,
With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend.â

To whom the king. âWith justice hast thou shown
A princeâs faults, and I with reason own.
That happy man, whom Jove still honours most,
Is more than armies, and himself a host.
Blessâd in his love, this wondrous hero stands;
Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.
Fain would my heart, which errâd through frantic rage,
The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.
If gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,[201]
Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow.
Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
And twice ten vases of refulgent mould:
Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
Twelve steeds unmatchâd in fleetness and in force,
And still victorious in the dusty course;
(Rich were the man whose ample stores exceed
The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
Skillâd in each art, unmatchâd in form divine,
The same I chose for more than vulgar charms,
When Lesbos sank beneath the heroâs arms:
All these, to buy his friendship, shall be paid,
And joinâd with these the long-contested maid;
With all her charms, BriseÃ¯s I resign,
And solemn swear those charms were never mine;
Untouchâd she stayâd, uninjured she removes,
Pure from my arms, and guiltless of my loves,[202]
These instant shall be his; and if the powers
Give to our arms proud Ilionâs hostile towers,
Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil divides)
With gold and brass his loaded navyâs sides:
Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
With copious love shall crown his warm embrace,
Such as himself will choose; who yield to none,
Or yield to Helenâs heavenly charms alone.
Yet hear me further: when our wars are oâer,
If safe we land on Argosâ fruitful shore,
There shall he live my son, our honours share,
And with Orestesâ self divide my care.
Yet moreâthree daughters in my court are bred,
And each well worthy of a royal bed;
Laodice and Iphigenia fair,[203]
And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair;
Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve,
I ask no presents, no reward for love:
Myself will give the dower; so vast a store
As never father gave a child before.
Seven ample cities shall confess his sway,
Him Enope, and PherÃ¦ him obey,
Cardamyle with ample turrets crownâd,
And sacred Pedasus for vines renownâd;
Ãpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:[204]
The whole extent to Pylosâ sandy plain,
Along the verdant margin of the main.
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
Bold are the men, and generous is the soil;
There shall he reign, with power and justice crownâd,
And rule the tributary realms around.
All this I give, his vengeance to control,
And sure all this may move his mighty soul.
Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares,
Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers,
Lives dark and dreadful in deep hellâs abodes,
And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods.
Great though he be, it fits him to obey,
Since more than his my years, and more my sway.â


[Illustration: ] PLUTO


The monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then:
âGreat Agamemnon! glorious king of men!
Such are thy offers as a prince may take,
And such as fits a generous king to make.
Let chosen delegates this hour be sent
(Myself will name them) to Pelidesâ tent.
Let PhÅnix lead, revered for hoary age,
Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.
Yet more to sanctify the word you send,
Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands;
Pray in deep silence,[205] and with purest hands.â[206]


[Illustration: ] THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES


He said; and all approved. The heralds bring
The cleansing water from the living spring.
The youth with wine the sacred goblets crownâd,
And large libations drenchâd the sands around.
The rite performâd, the chiefs their thirst allay,
Then from the royal tent they take their way;
Wise Nestor turns on each his careful eye,
Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply;
Much he advised them all, Ulysses most,
To deprecate the chief, and save the host.
Through the still night they march, and hear the roar
Of murmuring billows on the sounding shore.
To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound,
Whose liquid arms the mighty globe surround,
They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless,
And calm the rage of stern Ãacides.
And now, arrived, where on the sandy bay
The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay;
Amused at ease, the godlike man they found,
Pleased with the solemn harpâs harmonious sound.
(The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came;
Of polishâd silver was its costly frame.)
With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings
The immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
Patroclus only of the royal train,
Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain:
Full opposite he sat, and listenâd long,
In silence waiting till he ceased the song.
Unseen the Grecian embassy proceeds
To his high tent; the great Ulysses leads.
Achilles starting, as the chiefs he spied,
Leapâd from his seat, and laid the harp aside.
With like surprise arose Menoetiusâ son:
Pelides graspâd their hands, and thus begun:

âPrinces, all hail! whatever brought you here.
Or strong necessity, or urgent fear;
Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came;
To me more dear than all that bear the name.â

With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led,
And placed in seats with purple carpets spread.
Then thusââPatroclus, crown a larger bowl,
Mix purer wine, and open every soul.
Of all the warriors yonder host can send,
Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend.â

He said: Patroclus oâer the blazing fire
Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire:
The brazen vase Automedon sustains,
Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.
Achilles at the genial feast presides,
The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
Meanwhile Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise;
The tent is brightenâd with the rising blaze:
Then, when the languid flames at length subside,
He strows a bed of glowing embers wide,
Above the coals the smoking fragments turns
And sprinkles sacred salt from lifted urns;
With bread the glittering canisters they load,
Which round the board Menoetiusâ son bestowâd;
Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,
Each portion parts, and orders every rite.
The first fat offering to the immortals due,
Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw;
Then each, indulging in the social feast,
His thirst and hunger soberly repressâd.
That done, to PhÅnix Ajax gave the sign:
Not unperceived; Ulysses crownâd with wine
The foaming bowl, and instant thus began,
His speech addressing to the godlike man.

âHealth to Achilles! happy are thy guests!
Not those more honourâd whom Atrides feasts:
Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards,
That, Agamemnonâs regal tent affords;
But greater cares sit heavy on our souls,
Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.
What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
The dead we mourn, and for the living fear;
Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,
And owns no help but from thy saving hands:
Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call;
Their threatening tents already shade our wall:
Hear how with shouts their conquest they proclaim,
And point at every ship their vengeful flame!
For them the father of the gods declares,
Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies;
What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes!
He waits but for the morn, to sink in flame
The ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name.
Heavens! how my countryâs woes distract my mind,
Lest Fate accomplish all his rage designâd!
And must we, gods! our heads inglorious lay
In Trojan dust, and this the fatal day?
Return, Achilles: oh return, though late,
To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of Fate;
If in that heart or grief or courage lies,
Rise to redeem; ah, yet to conquer, rise!
The day may come, when, all our warriors slain,
That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain:
Regard in time, O prince divinely brave!
Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave.
When Peleus in his aged arms embraced
His parting son, these accents were his last:

ââMy child! with strength, with glory, and success,
Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless!
Trust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cares engage
To calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage:
From gentler manners let thy glory grow,
And shun contention, the sure source of woe;
That young and old may in thy praise combine,
The virtues of humanity be thineââ
This now-despised advice thy father gave;
Ah! check thy anger; and be truly brave.
If thou wilt yield to great Atridesâ prayers,
Gifts worthy thee his royal hand prepares;
If notâbut hear me, while I number oâer
The profferâd presents, an exhaustless store.
Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
And twice ten vases of refulgent mould;
Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
Twelve steeds unmatched in fleetness and in force,
And still victorious in the dusty course;
(Rich were the man, whose ample stores exceed
The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
Skillâd in each art, unmatchâd in form divine,
The same he chose for more than vulgar charms,
When Lesbos sank beneath thy conquering arms.
All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid,
And, joinâd with these, the long-contested maid;
With all her charms, BriseÃ¯s heâll resign,
And solemn swear those charms were only thine;
Untouchâd she stayâd, uninjured she removes,
Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
These instant shall be thine; and if the powers
Give to our arms proud Ilionâs hostile towers,
Then shalt thou store (when Greece the spoil divides)
With gold and brass thy loaded navyâs sides.
Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
With copious love shall crown thy warm embrace;
Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none,
Or yield to Helenâs heavenly charms alone.
Yet hear me further: when our wars are oâer,
If safe we land on Argosâ fruitful shore,
There shalt thou live his son, his honour share,
And with Orestesâ self divide his care.
Yet moreâthree daughters in his court are bred,
And each well worthy of a royal bed:
Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair:
Her shalt thou wed whom most thy eyes approve;
He asks no presents, no reward for love:
Himself will give the dower; so vast a store
As never father gave a child before.
Seven ample cities shall confess thy sway,
The Enope and PherÃ¦ thee obey,
Cardamyle with ample turrets crownâd,
And sacred Pedasus, for vines renownâd:
Ãpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
And rich Antheia with her flowery fields;
The whole extent to Pylosâ sandy plain,
Along the verdant margin of the main.
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.
There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crownâd,
And rule the tributary realms around.
Such are the proffers which this day we bring,
Such the repentance of a suppliant king.
But if all this, relentless, thou disdain,
If honour and if interest plead in vain,
Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford,
And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored.
If no regard thy suffering country claim,
Hear thy own glory, and the voice of fame:
For now that chief, whose unresisted ire
Made nations tremble, and whole hosts retire,
Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands,
And only triumphs to deserve thy hands.â

Then thus the goddess-born: âUlysses, hear
A faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear;
What in my secret soul is understood,
My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.
Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain:
Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
My heart detests him as the gates of hell.

âThen thus in short my fixâd resolves attend,
Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;
Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore,
But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,
The wretch and hero find their prize the same.
Alike regretted in the dust he lies,
Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
From danger guards them, and from want defends;
In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
And with the untasted food supplies her care:
For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;
Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,
And sweat laborious days in dust and blood.
I sackâd twelve ample cities on the main,[207]
And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain:
Then at Atridesâ haughty feet were laid
The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
Your mighty monarch these in peace possessâd;
Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
Some present, too, to every prince was paid;
And every prince enjoys the gift he made:
I only must refund, of all his train;
See what pre-eminence our merits gain!
My spoil alone his greedy soul delights:
My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights:
The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy;
But whatâs the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?
What to these shores the assembled nations draws,
What calls for vengeance but a womanâs cause?
Are fair endowments and a beauteous face
Beloved by none but those of Atreusâ race?
The wife whom choice and passion doth approve,
Sure every wise and worthy man will love.
Nor did my fair one less distinction claim;
Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame.
Wrongâd in my love, all proffers I disdain;
Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
Ye have my answerâwhat remains to do,
Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you.
What needs he the defence this arm can make?
Has he not walls no human force can shake?
Has he not fenced his guarded navy round
With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound?
And will not these (the wonders he has done)
Repel the rage of Priamâs single son?
There was a time (âtwas when for Greece I fought)
When Hectorâs prowess no such wonders wrought;
He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait
Achillesâ fury at the Scaean gate;
He tried it once, and scarce was saved by fate.
But now those ancient enmities are oâer;
To-morrow we the favouring gods implore;
Then shall you see our parting vessels crownâd,
And hear with oars the Hellespont resound.
The third day hence shall Pythia greet our sails,[208]
If mighty Neptune send propitious gales;
Pythia to her Achilles shall restore
The wealth he left for this detested shore:
Thither the spoils of this long war shall pass,
The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass:
My beauteous captives thither Iâll convey,
And all that rests of my unravishâd prey.
One only valued gift your tyrant gave,
And that resumedâthe fair Lyrnessian slave.
Then tell him: loud, that all the Greeks may hear,
And learn to scorn the wretch they basely fear;
(For armâd in impudence, mankind he braves,
And meditates new cheats on all his slaves;
Though shameless as he is, to face these eyes
Is what he dares not: if he dares he dies;)
Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline,
Nor share his council, nor his battle join;
For once deceivâd, was his; but twice were mine,
Noâlet the stupid prince, whom Jove deprives
Of sense and justice, run where frenzy drives;
His gifts are hateful: kings of such a kind
Stand but as slaves before a noble mind,
Not though he profferâd all himself possessâd,
And all his rapine could from others wrest:
Not all the golden tides of wealth that crown
The many-peopled Orchomenian town;[209]
Not all proud Thebesâ unrivallâd walls contain,
The worldâs great empress on the Egyptian plain
(That spreads her conquests oâer a thousand states,
And pours her heroes through a hundred gates,
Two hundred horsemen and two hundred cars
From each wide portal issuing to the wars);[210]
Though bribes were heapâd on bribes, in number more
Than dust in fields, or sands along the shore;
Should all these offers for my friendship call,
âTis he that offers, and I scorn them all.
Atridesâ daughter never shall be led
(An ill-matchâd consort) to Achillesâ bed;
Like golden Venus though she charmâd the heart,
And vied with Pallas in the works of art;
Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace,
I hate alliance with a tyrantâs race.
If heaven restore me to my realms with life,
The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife;
Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine,
And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine.
Blessâd in kind love, my years shall glide away,
Content with just hereditary sway;
There, deaf for ever to the martial strife,
Enjoy the dear prerogative of life.
Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.
Not all Apolloâs Pythian treasures hold,
Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,
Can bribe the poor possession of a day!
Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,
And steeds unrivallâd on the dusty plain:
But from our lips the vital spirit fled,
Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
And each alternate, life or fame, proposed;
Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town,
Short is my date, but deathless my renown:
If I return, I quit immortal praise
For years on years, and long-extended days.
Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake,
And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make;
To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy,
Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.
Joveâs arm displayâd asserts her from the skies!
Her hearts are strengthenâd, and her glories rise.
Go then to Greece, report our fixâd design;
Bid all your counsels, all your armies join,
Let all your forces, all your arts conspire,
To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.
One stratagem has failâd, and others will:
Ye find, Achilles is unconquerâd still.
Go thenâdigest my message as ye mayâ
But here this night let reverend PhÅnix stay:
His tedious toils and hoary hairs demand
A peaceful death in Pythiaâs friendly land.
But whether he remain or sail with me,
His age be sacred, and his will be free.â


[Illustration: ] GREEK GALLEY


The son of Peleus ceased: the chiefs around
In silence wrapt, in consternation drownâd,
Attend the stern reply. Then PhÅnix rose;
(Down his white beard a stream of sorrow flows;)
And while the fate of suffering Greece he mournâd,
With accent weak these tender words returnâd.


[Illustration: ] PROSERPINE


âDivine Achilles! wilt thou then retire,
And leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire?
If wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless mind,
How shall thy friend, thy PhÅnix, stay behind?
The royal Peleus, when from Pythiaâs coast
He sent thee early to the Achaian host;
Thy youth as then in sage debates unskillâd,
And new to perils of the direful field:
He bade me teach thee all the ways of war,
To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.
Never, ah, never let me leave thy side!
No time shall part us, and no fate divide,
Not though the god, that breathed my life, restore
The bloom I boasted, and the port I bore,
When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames
(Delightful Greece, the land of lovely dames),
My father faithless to my motherâs arms,
Old as he was, adored a strangerâs charms.
I tried what youth could do (at her desire)
To win the damsel, and prevent my sire.
My sire with curses loads my hated head,
And cries, âYe furies! barren be his bed.â
Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below,
And ruthless Proserpine, confirmâd his vow.
Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!
Gods! what a crime my impious heart designâd!
I thought (but some kind god that thought suppressâd)
To plunge the poniard in my fatherâs breast;
Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain
With prayers entreat me, and with force detain.
On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine,
They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine;
Strong guards they placed, and watchâd nine nights entire;
The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire.
The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all:
And, favourâd by the night, oâerleapâd the wall,
My travels thence through spacious Greece extend;
In Phthiaâs court at last my labours end.
Your sire received me, as his son caressâd,
With gifts enrichâd, and with possessions blessâd.
The strong Dolopians thenceforth ownâd my reign,
And all the coast that runs along the main.
By love to thee his bounties I repaid,
And early wisdom to thy soul conveyâd:
Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave:
A child I took thee, but a hero gave.
Thy infant breast a like affection showâd;
Still in my arms (an ever-pleasing load)
Or at my knee, by PhÅnix wouldst thou stand;
No food was grateful but from PhÅnixâ hand.[211]
I pass my watchings oâer thy helpless years,
The tender labours, the compliant cares,
The gods (I thought) reversed their hard decree,
And PhÅnix felt a fatherâs joys in thee:
Thy growing virtues justified my cares,
And promised comfort to my silver hairs.
Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resignâd;
A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind:
The gods (the only great, and only wise)
Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice;
Offending man their high compassion wins,
And daily prayers atone for daily sins.
Prayers are Joveâs daughters, of celestial race,
Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face;
With humble mien, and with dejected eyes,
Constant they follow, where injustice flies.
Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined,
Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples oâer mankind,
While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind.
Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove,
For him they mediate to the throne above:
When man rejects the humble suit they make,
The sire revenges for the daughtersâ sake;
From Jove commissionâd, fierce injustice then
Descends to punish unrelenting men.
O let not headlong passion bear the sway
These reconciling goddesses obey:
Due honours to the seed of Jove belong,
Due honours calm the fierce, and bend the strong.
Were these not paid thee by the terms we bring,
Were rage still harbourâd in the haughty king;
Nor Greece nor all her fortunes should engage
Thy friend to plead against so just a rage.
But since what honour asks the general sends,
And sends by those whom most thy heart commends;
The best and noblest of the Grecian train;
Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain!
Let me (my son) an ancient fact unfold,
A great example drawn from times of old;
Hear what our fathers were, and what their praise,
Who conquerâd their revenge in former days.

âWhere Calydon on rocky mountains stands[212]
Once fought the Ãtolian and Curetian bands;
To guard it those; to conquer, these advance;
And mutual deaths were dealt with mutual chance.
The silver Cynthia bade contention rise,
In vengeance of neglected sacrifice;
On OEneus fields she sent a monstrous boar,
That levellâd harvests, and whole forests tore:
This beast (when many a chief his tusks had slain)
Great Meleager stretchâd along the plain,
Then, for his spoils, a new debate arose,
The neighbour nations thence commencing foes.
Strong as they were, the bold Curetes failâd,
While Meleagerâs thundering arm prevailâd:
Till rage at length inflamed his lofty breast
(For rage invades the wisest and the best).

âCursed by Althaea, to his wrath he yields,
And in his wifeâs embrace forgets the fields.
(She from Marpessa sprung, divinely fair,
And matchless Idas, more than man in war:
The god of day adored the motherâs charms;
Against the god the father bent his arms:
The afflicted pair, their sorrows to proclaim,
From Cleopatra changed their daughterâs name,
And callâd Alcyone; a name to show
The fatherâs grief, the mourning motherâs woe.)
To her the chief retired from stern debate,
But found no peace from fierce Althaeaâs hate:
Althaeaâs hate the unhappy warrior drew,
Whose luckless hand his royal uncle slew;
She beat the ground, and callâd the powers beneath
On her own son to wreak her brotherâs death;
Hell heard her curses from the realms profound,
And the red fiends that walk the nightly round.
In vain Ãtolia her deliverer waits,
War shakes her walls, and thunders at her gates.
She sent ambassadors, a chosen band,
Priests of the gods, and elders of the land;
Besought the chief to save the sinking state:
Their prayers were urgent, and their proffers great:
(Full fifty acres of the richest ground,
Half pasture green, and half with vineyards crownâd:)
His suppliant father, aged OEneus, came;
His sisters followâd; even the vengeful dame,
Althaea, sues; his friends before him fall:
He stands relentless, and rejects them all.
Meanwhile the victorâs shouts ascend the skies;
The walls are scaled; the rolling flames arise;
At length his wife (a form divine) appears,
With piercing cries, and supplicating tears;
She paints the horrors of a conquerâd town,
The heroes slain, the palaces oâerthrown,
The matrons ravishâd, the whole race enslaved:
The warrior heard, he vanquishâd, and he saved.
The Ãtolians, long disdainâd, now took their turn,
And left the chief their broken faith to mourn.
Learn hence, betimes to curb pernicious ire,
Nor stay till yonder fleets ascend in fire;
Accept the presents; draw thy conquering sword;
And be amongst our guardian gods adored.â

Thus he: the stern Achilles thus replied:
âMy second father, and my reverend guide:
Thy friend, believe me, no such gifts demands,
And asks no honours from a mortalâs hands;
Jove honours me, and favours my designs;
His pleasure guides me, and his will confines;
And here I stay (if such his high behest)
While lifeâs warm spirit beats within my breast.
Yet hear one word, and lodge it in thy heart:
No more molest me on Atridesâ part:
Is it for him these tears are taught to flow,
For him these sorrows? for my mortal foe?
A generous friendship no cold medium knows,
Burns with one love, with one resentment glows;
One should our interests and our passions be;
My friend must hate the man that injures me.
Do this, my PhÅnix, âtis a generous part;
And share my realms, my honours, and my heart.
Let these return: our voyage, or our stay,
Rest undetermined till the dawning day.â

He ceased; then orderâd for the sageâs bed
A warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.
With that, stern Ajax his long silence broke,
And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke:

âHence let us goâwhy waste we time in vain?
See what effect our low submissions gain!
Liked or not liked, his words we must relate,
The Greeks expect them, and our heroes wait.
Proud as he is, that iron heart retains
Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed,
On just atonement, we remit the deed;
A sire the slaughter of his son forgives;
The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives:
The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign,
And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.[213]
The gods that unrelenting breast have steelâd,
And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.
One woman-slave was ravishâd from thy arms:
Lo, seven are offerâd, and of equal charms.
Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind;
Revere thy roof, and to thy guests be kind;
And know the men of all the Grecian host,
Who honour worth, and prize thy valour most.â

âO soul of battles, and thy peopleâs guide!
(To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied)
Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyrantâs name
My rage rekindles, and my soulâs on flame:
âTis just resentment, and becomes the brave:
Disgraced, dishonourâd, like the vilest slave!
Return, then, heroes! and our answer bear,
The glorious combat is no more my care;
Not till, amidst yon sinking navy slain,
The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main;
Not till the flames, by Hectorâs fury thrown,
Consume your vessels, and approach my own;
Just there, the impetuous homicide shall stand,
There cease his battle, and there feel our hand.â

This said, each prince a double goblet crownâd,
And cast a large libation on the ground;
Then to their vessels, through the gloomy shades,
The chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads.
Meantime Achillesâ slaves prepared a bed,
With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread:
There, till the sacred morn restored the day,
In slumber sweet the reverend PhÅnix lay.
But in his inner tent, an ampler space,
Achilles slept; and in his warm embrace
Fair Diomede of the Lesbian race.
Last, for Patroclus was the couch prepared,
Whose nightly joys the beauteous Iphis shared;
Achilles to his friend consignâd her charms
When Scyros fell before his conquering arms.

And now the elected chiefs whom Greece had sent,
Passâd through the hosts, and reachâd the royal tent.
Then rising all, with goblets in their hands,
The peers and leaders of the Achaian bands
Hailâd their return: Atrides first begun:

âSay what success? divine Laertesâ son!
Achillesâ high resolves declare to all:
Returns the chief, or must our navy fall?â

âGreat king of nations! (Ithacus replied)
Fixâd is his wrath, unconquerâd is his pride;
He slights thy friendship, thy proposals scorns,
And, thus implored, with fiercer fury burns.
To save our army, and our fleets to free,
Is not his care; but left to Greece and thee.
Your eyes shall view, when morning paints the sky,
Beneath his oars the whitening billows fly;
Us too he bids our oars and sails employ,
Nor hope the fall of heaven-protected Troy;
For Jove oâershades her with his arm divine,
Inspires her war, and bids her glory shine.
Such was his word: what further he declared,
These sacred heralds and great Ajax heard.
But PhÅnix in his tent the chief retains,
Safe to transport him to his native plains
When morning dawns; if other he decree,
His age is sacred, and his choice is free.â

Ulysses ceased: the great Achaian host,
With sorrow seized, in consternation lost,
Attend the stern reply. Tydides broke
The general silence, and undaunted spoke.
âWhy should we gifts to proud Achilles send,
Or strive with prayers his haughty soul to bend?
His countryâs woes he glories to deride,
And prayers will burst that swelling heart with pride.
Be the fierce impulse of his rage obeyâd,
Our battles let him or desert or aid;
Then let him arm when Jove or he think fit:
That, to his madness, or to Heaven commit:
What for ourselves we can, is always ours;
This night, let due repast refresh our powers;
(For strength consists in spirits and in blood,
And those are owed to generous wine and food;)
But when the rosy messenger of day
Strikes the blue mountains with her golden ray,
Ranged at the ships, let all our squadrons shine
In flaming arms, a long-extended line:
In the dread front let great Atrides stand,
The first in danger, as in high command.â

Shouts of acclaim the listening heroes raise,
Then each to Heaven the due libations pays;
Till sleep, descending oâer the tents, bestows
The grateful blessings of desired repose.[214]


[Illustration: ] ACHILLES




BOOK X.


ARGUMENT.


THE NIGHT-ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES.


Upon the refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress of
Agamemnon is described in the most lively manner. He takes no rest that
night, but passes through the camp, awaking the leaders, and contriving
all possible methods for the public safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses,
and Diomed are employed in raising the rest of the captains. They call
a council of war, and determine to send scouts into the enemiesâ camp,
to learn their posture, and discover their intentions. Diomed
undertakes this hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses for
his companion. In their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector had
sent on a like design to the camp of the Grecians. From him they are
informed of the situation of the Trojan and auxiliary forces, and
particularly of Rhesus, and the Thracians who were lately arrived. They
pass on with success; kill Rhesus, with several of his officers, and
seize the famous horses of that prince, with which they return in
triumph to the camp.
    The same night continues; the scene lies in the two camps.


All night the chiefs before their vessels lay,
And lost in sleep the labours of the day:
All but the king: with various thoughts oppressâd,[215]
His countryâs cares lay rolling in his breast.
As when by lightnings Joveâs ethereal power
Foretels the rattling hail, or weighty shower,
Or sends soft snows to whiten all the shore,
Or bids the brazen throat of war to roar;
By fits one flash succeeds as one expires,
And heaven flames thick with momentary fires:
So bursting frequent from Atridesâ breast,
Sighs following sighs his inward fears confessâd.
Now oâer the fields, dejected, he surveys
From thousand Trojan fires the mounting blaze;
Hears in the passing wind their music blow,
And marks distinct the voices of the foe.
Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast,
Anxious he sorrows for the endangered host.
He rends his hair, in sacrifice to Jove,
And sues to him that ever lives above:
Inly he groans; while glory and despair
Divide his heart, and wage a double war.

A thousand cares his labouring breast revolves;
To seek sage Nestor now the chief resolves,
With him, in wholesome counsels, to debate
What yet remains to save the afflicted state.
He rose, and first he cast his mantle round,
Next on his feet the shining sandals bound;
A lionâs yellow spoils his back concealâd;
His warlike hand a pointed javelin held.
Meanwhile his brother, pressâd with equal woes,
Alike denied the gifts of soft repose,
Laments for Greece, that in his cause before
So much had sufferâd and must suffer more.
A leopardâs spotted hide his shoulders spread:
A brazen helmet glitterâd on his head:
Thus (with a javelin in his hand) he went
To wake Atrides in the royal tent.
Already waked, Atrides he descried,
His armour buckling at his vesselâs side.
Joyful they met; the Spartan thus begun:
âWhy puts my brother his bright armour on?
Sends he some spy, amidst these silent hours,
To try yon camp, and watch the Trojan powers?
But say, what hero shall sustain that task?
Such bold exploits uncommon courage ask;
Guideless, alone, through nightâs dark shade to go,
And midst a hostile camp explore the foe.â

To whom the king: âIn such distress we stand,
No vulgar counsel our affairs demand;
Greece to preserve, is now no easy part,
But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art.
For Jove, averse, our humble prayer denies,
And bows his head to Hectorâs sacrifice.
What eye has witnessâd, or what ear believed,
In one great day, by one great arm achieved,
Such wondrous deeds as Hectorâs hand has done,
And we beheld, the last revolving sun?
What honours the beloved of Jove adorn!
Sprung from no god, and of no goddess born;
Yet such his acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell,
And curse the battle where their fathers fell.

âNow speed thy hasty course along the fleet,
There call great Ajax, and the prince of Crete;
Ourself to hoary Nestor will repair;
To keep the guards on duty be his care,
(For Nestorâs influence best that quarter guides,
Whose son with Merion, oâer the watch presides.â)
To whom the Spartan: âThese thy orders borne,
Say, shall I stay, or with despatch return?â
âThere shall thou stay, (the king of men replied,)
Else may we miss to meet, without a guide,
The paths so many, and the camp so wide.
Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers raise,
Urge by their fathersâ fame their future praise.
Forget we now our state and lofty birth;
Not titles here, but works, must prove our worth.
To labour is the lot of man below;
And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe.â

This said, each parted to his several cares:
The king to Nestorâs sable ship repairs;
The sage protector of the Greeks he found
Stretchâd in his bed with all his arms around;
The various-colourâd scarf, the shield he rears,
The shining helmet, and the pointed spears;
The dreadful weapons of the warriorâs rage,
That, old in arms, disdainâd the peace of age.
Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head,
The hoary monarch raised his eyes and said:

âWhat art thou, speak, that on designs unknown,
While others sleep, thus range the camp alone;
Seekâst thou some friend or nightly sentinel?
Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell.â

âO son of Neleus, (thus the king rejoinâd,)
Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind!
Lo, here the wretched Agamemnon stands,
The unhappy general of the Grecian bands,
Whom Jove decrees with daily cares to bend,
And woes, that only with his life shall end!
Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain,
And scarce my heart support its load of pain.
No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known,
Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone,
With fears distracted, with no fixâd design;
And all my peopleâs miseries are mine.
If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest,
(Since cares, like mine, deprive thy soul of rest,)
Impart thy counsel, and assist thy friend;
Now let us jointly to the trench descend,
At every gate the fainting guard excite,
Tired with the toils of day and watch of night;
Else may the sudden foe our works invade,
So near, and favourâd by the gloomy shade.â

To him thus Nestor: âTrust the powers above,
Nor think proud Hectorâs hopes confirmâd by Jove:
How ill agree the views of vain mankind,
And the wise counsels of the eternal mind!
Audacious Hector, if the gods ordain
That great Achilles rise and rage again,
What toils attend thee, and what woes remain!
Lo, faithful Nestor thy command obeys;
The care is next our other chiefs to raise:
Ulysses, Diomed, we chiefly need;
Meges for strength, Oileus famed for speed.
Some other be despatchâd of nimbler feet,
To those tall ships, remotest of the fleet,
Where lie great Ajax and the king of Crete.[216]
To rouse the Spartan I myself decree;
Dear as he is to us, and dear to thee,
Yet must I tax his sloth, that claims no share
With his great brother in his martial care:
Him it behoved to every chief to sue,
Preventing every part performâd by you;
For strong necessity our toils demands,
Claims all our hearts, and urges all our hands.â

To whom the king: âWith reverence we allow
Thy just rebukes, yet learn to spare them now:
My generous brother is of gentle kind,
He seems remiss, but bears a valiant mind;
Through too much deference to our sovereign sway,
Content to follow when we lead the way:
But now, our ills industrious to prevent,
Long ere the rest he rose, and sought my tent.
The chiefs you named, already at his call,
Prepare to meet us near the navy-wall;
Assembling there, between the trench and gates,
Near the night-guards, our chosen council waits.â

âThen none (said Nestor) shall his rule withstand,
For great examples justify command.â
With that, the venerable warrior rose;
The shining greaves his manly legs enclose;
His purple mantle golden buckles joinâd,
Warm with the softest wool, and doubly lined.
Then rushing from his tent, he snatchâd in haste
His steely lance, that lightenâd as he passâd.
The camp he traversed through the sleeping crowd,
Stoppâd at Ulyssesâ tent, and callâd aloud.
Ulysses, sudden as the voice was sent,
Awakes, starts up, and issues from his tent.
âWhat new distress, what sudden cause of fright,
Thus leads you wandering in the silent night?â
âO prudent chief! (the Pylian sage replied)
Wise as thou art, be now thy wisdom tried:
Whatever means of safety can be sought,
Whatever counsels can inspire our thought,
Whatever methods, or to fly or fight;
All, all depend on this important night!â
He heard, returnâd, and took his painted shield;
Then joinâd the chiefs, and followâd through the field.
Without his tent, bold Diomed they found,
All sheathed in arms, his brave companions round:
Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field,
His head reclining on his bossy shield.
A wood of spears stood by, that, fixâd upright,
Shot from their flashing points a quivering light.
A bullâs black hide composed the heroâs bed;
A splendid carpet rollâd beneath his head.
Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakes
The slumbering chief, and in these words awakes:

âRise, son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong
Rest seems inglorious, and the night too long.
But sleepâst thou now, when from yon hill the foe
Hangs oâer the fleet, and shades our walls below?â

At this, soft slumber from his eyelids fled;
The warrior saw the hoary chief, and said:
âWondrous old man! whose soul no respite knows,
Though years and honours bid thee seek repose,
Let younger Greeks our sleeping warriors wake;
Ill fits thy age these toils to undertake.â
âMy friend, (he answered,) generous is thy care;
These toils, my subjects and my sons might bear;
Their loyal thoughts and pious love conspire
To ease a sovereign and relieve a sire:
But now the last despair surrounds our host;
No hour must pass, no moment must be lost;
Each single Greek, in this conclusive strife,
Stands on the sharpest edge of death or life:
Yet, if my years thy kind regard engage,
Employ thy youth as I employ my age;
Succeed to these my cares, and rouse the rest;
He serves me most, who serves his country best.â

This said, the hero oâer his shoulders flung
A lionâs spoils, that to his ankles hung;
Then seized his ponderous lance, and strode along.
Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed,
The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead.

And now the chiefs approach the nightly guard;
A wakeful squadron, each in arms prepared:
The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep,
And, couching close, repel invading sleep.
So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain,
With toil protected from the prowling train;
When the gaunt lioness, with hunger bold,
Springs from the mountains toward the guarded fold:
Through breaking woods her rustling course they hear;
Loud, and more loud, the clamours strike their ear
Of hounds and men: they start, they gaze around,
Watch every side, and turn to every sound.
Thus watchâd the Grecians, cautious of surprise,
Each voice, each motion, drew their ears and eyes:
Each step of passing feet increased the affright;
And hostile Troy was ever full in sight.
Nestor with joy the wakeful band surveyâd,
And thus accosted through the gloomy shade.
ââTis well, my sons! your nightly cares employ;
Else must our host become the scorn of Troy.
Watch thus, and Greece shall live.â The hero said;
Then oâer the trench the following chieftains led.
His son, and godlike Merion, marchâd behind
(For these the princes to their council joinâd).
The trenches passâd, the assembled kings around
In silent state the consistory crownâd.
A place there was, yet undefiled with gore,
The spot where Hector stoppâd his rage before;
When night descending, from his vengeful hand
Reprieved the relics of the Grecian band:
(The plain beside with mangled corps was spread,
And all his progress markâd by heaps of dead:)
There sat the mournful kings: when Neleusâ son,
The council opening, in these words begun:

âIs there (said he) a chief so greatly brave,
His life to hazard, and his country save?
Lives there a man, who singly dares to go
To yonder camp, or seize some straggling foe?
Or favourâd by the night approach so near,
Their speech, their counsels, and designs to hear?
If to besiege our navies they prepare,
Or Troy once more must be the seat of war?
This could he learn, and to our peers recite,
And pass unharmâd the dangers of the night;
What fame were his through all succeeding days,
While PhÅbus shines, or men have tongues to praise!
What gifts his grateful country would bestow!
What must not Greece to her deliverer owe?
A sable ewe each leader should provide,
With each a sable lambkin by her side;
At every rite his share should be increased,
And his the foremost honours of the feast.â

Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear,
Tydides spokeââThe man you seek is here.
Through yon black camps to bend my dangerous way,
Some god within commands, and I obey.
But let some other chosen warrior join,
To raise my hopes, and second my design.
By mutual confidence and mutual aid,
Great deeds are done, and great discoveries made;
The wise new prudence from the wise acquire,
And one brave hero fans anotherâs fire.â

Contending leaders at the word arose;
Each generous breast with emulation glows;
So brave a task each Ajax strove to share,
Bold Merion strove, and Nestorâs valiant heir;
The Spartan wishâd the second place to gain,
And great Ulysses wishâd, nor wishâd in vain.
Then thus the king of men the contest ends:
âThou first of warriors, and thou best of friends,
Undaunted Diomed! what chief to join
In this great enterprise, is only thine.
Just be thy choice, without affection made;
To birth, or office, no respect be paid;
Let worth determine here.â The monarch spake,
And inly trembled for his brotherâs sake.

âThen thus (the godlike Diomed rejoinâd)
My choice declares the impulse of my mind.
How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands
To lend his counsels and assist our hands?
A chief, whose safety is Minervaâs care;
So famed, so dreadful, in the works of war:
Blessâd in his conduct, I no aid require;
Wisdom like his might pass through flames of fire.â

âIt fits thee not, before these chiefs of fame,
(Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame:
Praise from a friend, or censure from a foe,
Are lost on hearers that our merits know.
But let us hasteâNight rolls the hours away,
The reddening orient shows the coming day,
The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains,
And of nightâs empire but a third remains.â

Thus having spoke, with generous ardour pressâd,
In arms terrific their huge limbs they dressâd.
A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave,
And ample buckler, to Tydides gave:
Then in a leathern helm he cased his head,
Short of its crest, and with no plume oâerspread:
(Such as by youths unused to arms are worn:)
No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn.
Next him Ulysses took a shining sword,
A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored:
A well-proved casque, with leather braces bound,
(Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crownâd;
Soft wool within; without, in order spread,[217]
A boarâs white teeth grinnâd horrid oâer his head.
This from Amyntor, rich Ormenusâ son,
Autolycus by fraudful rapine won,
And gave Amphidamas; from him the prize
Molus received, the pledge of social ties;
The helmet next by Merion was possessâd,
And now Ulyssesâ thoughtful temples pressâd.
Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake,
And dark through paths oblique their progress take.
Just then, in sign she favourâd their intent,
A long-wingâd heron great Minerva sent:
This, though surrounding shades obscured their view,
By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew.
As from the right she soarâd, Ulysses prayâd,
Hailâd the glad omen, and addressâd the maid:

âO daughter of that god whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the saber shield!
O thou! for ever present in my way,
Who all my motions, all my toils survey!
Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy shade,
Safe by thy succour to our ships conveyâd,
And let some deed this signal night adorn,
To claim the tears of Trojans yet unborn.â

Then godlike Diomed preferrâd his prayer:
âDaughter of Jove, unconquerâd Pallas! hear.
Great queen of arms, whose favour Tydeus won,
As thou defendâst the sire, defend the son.
When on Ãsopusâ banks the banded powers
Of Greece he left, and sought the Theban towers,
Peace was his charge; received with peaceful show,
He went a legate, but returnâd a foe:
Then helpâd by thee, and coverâd by thy shield,
He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield.
So now be present, O celestial maid!
So still continue to the race thine aid!
A youthful steer shall fall beneath the stroke,
Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
With ample forehead, and with spreading horns,
Whose taper tops refulgent gold adorns.â
The heroes prayâd, and Pallas from the skies
Accords their vow, succeeds their enterprise.
Now, like two lions panting for the prey,
With dreadful thoughts they trace the dreary way,
Through the black horrors of the ensanguined plain,
Through dust, through blood, oâer arms, and hills of slain.

Nor less bold Hector, and the sons of Troy,
On high designs the wakeful hours employ;
The assembled peers their lofty chief enclosed;
Who thus the counsels of his breast proposed:

âWhat glorious man, for high attempts prepared,
Dares greatly venture for a rich reward?
Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make,
What watch they keep, and what resolves they take?
If now subdued they meditate their flight,
And, spent with toil, neglect the watch of night?
His be the chariot that shall please him most,
Of all the plunder of the vanquishâd host;
His the fair steeds that all the rest excel,
And his the glory to have served so well.â

A youth there was among the tribes of Troy,
Dolon his name, Eumedesâ only boy,
(Five girls beside the reverend herald told.)
Rich was the son in brass, and rich in gold;
Not blessâd by nature with the charms of face,
But swift of foot, and matchless in the race.
âHector! (he said) my courage bids me meet
This high achievement, and explore the fleet:
But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies,
And swear to grant me the demanded prize;
The immortal coursers, and the glittering car,
That bear Pelides through the ranks of war.
Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go,
Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know,
Even to the royal tent pursue my way,
And all their counsels, all their aims betray.â

The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high,
Attesting thus the monarch of the sky:
âBe witness thou! immortal lord of all!
Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall:
By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne,
And him alone the immortal steeds adorn.â

Thus Hector swore: the gods were callâd in vain,
But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain:
Across his back the bended bow he flung,
A wolfâs grey hide around his shoulders hung,
A ferretâs downy fur his helmet lined,
And in his hand a pointed javelin shined.
Then (never to return) he sought the shore,
And trod the path his feet must tread no more.
Scarce had he passâd the steeds and Trojan throng,
(Still bending forward as he coursed along,)
When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread
Ulysses markâd, and thus to Diomed;

âO friend! I hear some step of hostile feet,
Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet;
Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main;
Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.
Yet let him pass, and win a little space;
Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace.
But if too swift of foot he flies before,
Confine his course along the fleet and shore,
Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ,
And intercept his hoped return to Troy.â

With that they steppâd aside, and stoopâd their head,
(As Dolon passâd,) behind a heap of dead:
Along the path the spy unwary flew;
Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue.
So distant they, and such the space between,
As when two teams of mules divide the green,
(To whom the hind like shares of land allows,)
When now new furrows part the approaching ploughs.
Now Dolon, listening, heard them as they passâd;
Hector (he thought) had sent, and checkâd his haste,
Till scarce at distance of a javelinâs throw,
No voice succeeding, he perceived the foe.
As when two skilful hounds the leveret wind;
Or chase through woods obscure the trembling hind;
Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way,
And from the herd still turn the flying prey:
So fast, and with such fears, the Trojan flew;
So close, so constant, the bold Greeks pursue.
Now almost on the fleet the dastard falls,
And mingles with the guards that watch the walls;
When brave Tydides stoppâd; a genârous thought
(Inspired by Pallas) in his bosom wrought,
Lest on the foe some forward Greek advance,
And snatch the glory from his lifted lance.
Then thus aloud: âWhoeâer thou art, remain;
This javelin else shall fix thee to the plain.â
He said, and high in air the weapon cast,
Which wilful errâd, and oâer his shoulder passâd;
Then fixâd in earth. Against the trembling wood
The wretch stood proppâd, and quiverâd as he stood;
A sudden palsy seized his turning head;
His loose teeth chatterâd, and his colour fled;
The panting warriors seize him as he stands,
And with unmanly tears his life demands.

âO spare my youth, and for the breath I owe,
Large gifts of price my father shall bestow:
Vast heaps of brass shall in your ships be told,
And steel well-temperâd and refulgent gold.â

To whom Ulysses made this wise reply:
âWhoeâer thou art, be bold, nor fear to die.
What moves thee, say, when sleep has closed the sight,
To roam the silent fields in dead of night?
Camâst thou the secrets of our camp to find,
By Hector prompted, or thy daring mind?
Or art some wretch by hopes of plunder led,
Through heaps of carnage, to despoil the dead?â

Then thus pale Dolon, with a fearful look:
(Still, as he spoke, his limbs with horror shook:)
âHither I came, by Hectorâs words deceived;
Much did he promise, rashly I believed:
No less a bribe than great Achillesâ car,
And those swift steeds that sweep the ranks of war,
Urged me, unwilling, this attempt to make;
To learn what counsels, what resolves you take:
If now subdued, you fix your hopes on flight,
And, tired with toils, neglect the watch of night.â

âBold was thy aim, and glorious was the prize,
(Ulysses, with a scornful smile, replies,)
Far other rulers those proud steeds demand,
And scorn the guidance of a vulgar hand;
Even great Achilles scarce their rage can tame,
Achilles sprung from an immortal dame.
But say, be faithful, and the truth recite!
Where lies encampâd the Trojan chief to-night?
Where stand his coursers? in what quarter sleep
Their other princes? tell what watch they keep:
Say, since this conquest, what their counsels are;
Or here to combat, from their city far,
Or back to Ilionâs walls transfer the war?â

Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedesâ son:
âWhat Dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own.
Hector, the peers assembling in his tent,
A council holds at Ilusâ monument.
No certain guards the nightly watch partake;
Whereâer yon fires ascend, the Trojans wake:
Anxious for Troy, the guard the natives keep;
Safe in their cares, the auxiliar forces sleep,
Whose wives and infants, from the danger far,
Discharge their souls of half the fears of war.â

âThen sleep those aids among the Trojan train,
(Inquired the chief,) or scattered oâer the plain?â
To whom the spy: âTheir powers they thus dispose
The Paeons, dreadful with their bended bows,
The Carians, Caucons, the Pelasgian host,
And Leleges, encamp along the coast.
Not distant far, lie higher on the land
The Lycian, Mysian, and Maeonian band,
And Phrygiaâs horse, by Thymbrasâ ancient wall;
The Thracians utmost, and apart from all.
These Troy but lately to her succour won,
Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneusâ son:
I saw his coursers in proud triumph go,
Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow;
Rich silver plates his shining car infold;
His solid arms, refulgent, flame with gold;
No mortal shoulders suit the glorious load,
Celestial panoply, to grace a god!
Let me, unhappy, to your fleet be borne,
Or leave me here, a captiveâs fate to mourn,
In cruel chains, till your return reveal
The truth or falsehood of the news I tell.â

To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown:
âThink not to live, though all the truth be shown:
Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strife
To risk more bravely thy now forfeit life?
Or that again our camps thou mayâst explore?
Noâonce a traitor, thou betrayâst no more.â

Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch prepared
With humble blandishment to stroke his beard,
Like lightning swift the wrathful falchion flew,
Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two;
One instant snatchâd his trembling soul to hell,
The head, yet speaking, mutterâd as it fell.
The furry helmet from his brow they tear,
The wolfâs grey hide, the unbended bow and spear;
These great Ulysses lifting to the skies,
To favouring Pallas dedicates the prize:

âGreat queen of arms, receive this hostile spoil,
And let the Thracian steeds reward our toil;
Thee, first of all the heavenly host, we praise;
O speed our labours, and direct our ways!â
This said, the spoils, with dropping gore defaced,
High on a spreading tamarisk he placed;
Then heapâd with reeds and gathered boughs the plain,
To guide their footsteps to the place again.

Through the still night they cross the devious fields,
Slippery with blood, oâer arms and heaps of shields,
Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay,
And eased in sleep the labours of the day.
Ranged in three lines they view the prostrate band:
The horses yoked beside each warrior stand.
Their arms in order on the ground reclined,
Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined:
Amidst lay Rhesus, stretchâd in sleep profound,
And the white steeds behind his chariot bound.
The welcome sight Ulysses first descries,
And points to Diomed the tempting prize.
âThe man, the coursers, and the car behold!
Described by Dolon, with the arms of gold.
Now, brave Tydides! now thy courage try,
Approach the chariot, and the steeds untie;
Or if thy soul aspire to fiercer deeds,
Urge thou the slaughter, while I seize the steeds.â

Pallas (this said) her heroâs bosom warms,
Breathed in his heart, and strung his nervous arms;
Whereâer he passâd, a purple stream pursued
His thirsty falchion, fat with hostile blood,
Bathed all his footsteps, dyed the fields with gore,
And a low groan remurmurâd through the shore.
So the grim lion, from his nightly den,
Oâerleaps the fences, and invades the pen,
On sheep or goats, resistless in his way,
He falls, and foaming rends the guardless prey;
Nor stoppâd the fury of his vengeful hand,
Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian band.
Ulysses following, as his partner slew,
Back by the foot each slaughterâd warrior drew;
The milk-white coursers studious to convey
Safe to the ships, he wisely cleared the way:
Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles bred,
Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead.
Now twelve despatchâd, the monarch last they found;
Tydidesâ falchion fixâd him to the ground.
Just then a deathful dream Minerva sent,
A warlike form appearâd before his tent,
Whose visionary steel his bosom tore:
So dreamâd the monarch, and awaked no more.[218]

Ulysses now the snowy steeds detains,
And leads them, fastenâd by the silver reins;
These, with his bow unbent, he lashâd along;
(The scourge forgot, on Rhesusâ chariot hung;)
Then gave his friend the signal to retire;
But him, new dangers, new achievements fire;
Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking blade
To send more heroes to the infernal shade,
Drag off the car where Rhesusâ armour lay,
Or heave with manly force, and lift away.
While unresolved the son of Tydeus stands,
Pallas appears, and thus her chief commands:

âEnough, my son; from further slaughter cease,
Regard thy safety, and depart in peace;
Haste to the ships, the gotten spoils enjoy,
Nor tempt too far the hostile gods of Troy.â

The voice divine confessâd the martial maid;
In haste he mounted, and her word obeyâd;
The coursers fly before Ulyssesâ bow,
Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow.

Not unobserved they passâd: the god of light
Had watchâd his Troy, and markâd Minervaâs flight,
Saw Tydeusâ son with heavenly succour blessâd,
And vengeful anger fillâd his sacred breast.
Swift to the Trojan camp descends the power,
And wakes Hippocoon in the morning-hour;
(On Rhesusâ side accustomâd to attend,
A faithful kinsman, and instructive friend;)
He rose, and saw the field deformâd with blood,
An empty space where late the coursers stood,
The yet-warm Thracians panting on the coast;
For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most:
Now while on Rhesusâ name he calls in vain,
The gathering tumult spreads oâer all the plain;
On heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright,
And wondering view the slaughters of the night.

Meanwhile the chiefs, arriving at the shade
Where late the spoils of Hectorâs spy were laid,
Ulysses stoppâd; to him Tydides bore
The trophy, dropping yet with Dolonâs gore:
Then mounts again; again their nimbler feet
The coursers ply, and thunder towards the fleet.


[Illustration: ] DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS


Old Nestor first perceived the approaching sound,
Bespeaking thus the Grecian peers around:
âMethinks the noise of trampling steeds I hear,
Thickening this way, and gathering on my ear;
Perhaps some horses of the Trojan breed
(So may, ye gods! my pious hopes succeed)
The great Tydides and Ulysses bear,
Returnâd triumphant with this prize of war.
Yet much I fear (ah, may that fear be vain!)
The chiefs outnumberâd by the Trojan train;
Perhaps, even now pursued, they seek the shore;
Or, oh! perhaps those heroes are no more.â

Scarce had he spoke, when, lo! the chiefs appear,
And spring to earth; the Greeks dismiss their fear:
With words of friendship and extended hands
They greet the kings; and Nestor first demands:

âSay thou, whose praises all our host proclaim,
Thou living glory of the Grecian name!
Say whence these coursers? by what chance bestowâd,
The spoil of foes, or present of a god?
Not those fair steeds, so radiant and so gay,
That draw the burning chariot of the day.
Old as I am, to age I scorn to yield,
And daily mingle in the martial field;
But sure till now no coursers struck my sight
Like these, conspicuous through the ranks of fight.
Some god, I deem, conferred the glorious prize,
Blessâd as ye are, and favourites of the skies;
The care of him who bids the thunder roar,
And her, whose fury bathes the world with gore.â

âFather! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoinâd,)
The gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind.
Of Thracian lineage are the steeds ye view,
Whose hostile king the brave Tydides slew;
Sleeping he died, with all his guards around,
And twelve beside lay gasping on the ground.
These other spoils from conquerâd Dolon came,
A wretch, whose swiftness was his only fame;
By Hector sent our forces to explore,
He now lies headless on the sandy shore.â

Then oâer the trench the bounding coursers flew;
The joyful Greeks with loud acclaim pursue.
Straight to Tydidesâ high pavilion borne,
The matchless steeds his ample stalls adorn:
The neighing coursers their new fellows greet,
And the full racks are heapâd with generous wheat.
But Dolonâs armour, to his ships conveyâd,
High on the painted stern Ulysses laid,
A trophy destinâd to the blue-eyed maid.

Now from nocturnal sweat and sanguine stain
They cleanse their bodies in the neighbâring main:
Then in the polished bath, refreshâd from toil,
Their joints they supple with dissolving oil,
In due repast indulge the genial hour,
And first to Pallas the libations pour:
They sit, rejoicing in her aid divine,
And the crownâd goblet foams with floods of wine.




BOOK XI.


ARGUMENT


THE THIRD BATTLE, AND THE ACTS OF AGAMEMNON.


Agamemnon, having armed himself, leads the Grecians to battle; Hector
prepares the Trojans to receive them, while Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva
give the signals of war. Agamemnon bears all before him and Hector is
commanded by Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the
engagement, till the king shall be wounded and retire from the field.
He then makes a great slaughter of the enemy. Ulysses and Diomed put a
stop to him for a time but the latter, being wounded by Paris, is
obliged to desert his companion, who is encompassed by the Trojans,
wounded, and in the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him.
Hector comes against Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes, and
rallies the Greeks. In the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of the
army, is pierced with an arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight in
Nestorâs chariot. Achilles (who overlooked the action from his ship)
sent Patroclus to inquire which of the Greeks was wounded in that
manner; Nestor entertains him in his tent with an account of the
accidents of the day, and a long recital of some former wars which he
remembered, tending to put Patroclus upon persuading Achilles to fight
for his countrymen, or at least to permit him to do it, clad in
Achillesâ armour. Patroclus, on his return, meets Eurypylus also
wounded, and assists him in that distress.
    This book opens with the eight-and-twentieth day of the poem, and
    the same day, with its various actions and adventures is extended
    through the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth,
    seventeenth, and part of the eighteenth books. The scene lies in
    the field near the monument of Ilus.


The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,[219]
Now rose refulgent from Tithonusâ bed;
With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light:
When baleful Eris, sent by Joveâs command,
The torch of discord blazing in her hand,
Through the red skies her bloody sign extends,
And, wrapt in tempests, oâer the fleet descends.
High on Ulyssesâ bark her horrid stand
She took, and thunderâd through the seas and land.

Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound,
Whose ships, remote, the guarded navy bound,
Thence the black fury through the Grecian throng
With horror sounds the loud Orthian song:
The navy shakes, and at the dire alarms
Each bosom boils, each warrior starts to arms.
No more they sigh, inglorious to return,
But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.


[Illustration: ] THE DESCENT OF DISCORD


The king of men his hardy host inspires
With loud command, with great example fires!
Himself first rose, himself before the rest
His mighty limbs in radiant armour dressâd,
And first he cased his manly legs around
In shining greaves with silver buckles bound;
The beaming cuirass next adornâd his breast,
The same which once king Cinyras possessâd:
(The fame of Greece and her assembled host
Had reachâd that monarch on the Cyprian coast;
âTwas then, the friendship of the chief to gain,
This glorious gift he sent, nor sent in vain:)
Ten rows of azure steel the work infold,
Twice ten of tin, and twelve of ductile gold;
Three glittering dragons to the gorget rise,
Whose imitated scales against the skies
Reflected various light, and arching bowâd,
Like colourâd rainbows oâer a showery cloud
(Joveâs wondrous bow, of three celestial dies,
Placed as a sign to man amidst the skies).
A radiant baldric, oâer his shoulder tied,
Sustainâd the sword that glitterâd at his side:
Gold was the hilt, a silver sheath encased
The shining blade, and golden hangers graced.
His bucklerâs mighty orb was next displayâd,
That round the warrior cast a dreadful shade;
Ten zones of brass its ample brim surround,
And twice ten bosses the bright convex crownâd:
Tremendous Gorgon frownâd upon its field,
And circling terrors fillâd the expressive shield:
Within its concave hung a silver thong,
On which a mimic serpent creeps along,
His azure length in easy waves extends,
Till in three heads the embroiderâd monster ends.
Last oâer his brows his fourfold helm he placed,
With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
And in his hands two steely javelins wields,
That blaze to heaven, and lighten all the fields.

That instant Juno, and the martial maid,
In happy thunders promised Greece their aid;
High oâer the chief they clashâd their arms in air,
And, leaning from the clouds, expect the war.

Close to the limits of the trench and mound,
The fiery coursers to their chariots bound
The squires restrainâd: the foot, with those who wield
The lighter arms, rush forward to the field.
To second these, in close array combined,
The squadrons spread their sable wings behind.
Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy sun,
As with the light the warriorsâ toils begun.
Even Jove, whose thunder spoke his wrath, distillâd
Red drops of blood oâer all the fatal field;[220]
The woes of men unwilling to survey,
And all the slaughters that must stain the day.

Near Ilusâ tomb, in order ranged around,
The Trojan lines possessâd the rising ground:
There wise Polydamas and Hector stood;
Ãneas, honourâd as a guardian god;
Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine;
The brother-warriors of Antenorâs line:
With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous face
And fair proportion matchâd the ethereal race.
Great Hector, coverâd with his spacious shield,
Plies all the troops, and orders all the field.
As the red star now shows his sanguine fires
Through the dark clouds, and now in night retires,
Thus through the ranks appearâd the godlike man,
Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van;
While streamy sparkles, restless as he flies,
Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies.
As sweating reapers in some wealthy field,
Ranged in two bands, their crooked weapons wield,
Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet;
Thick fall the heapy harvests at their feet:
So Greece and Troy the field of war divide,
And falling ranks are strowâd on every side.
None stoopâd a thought to base inglorious flight;[221]
But horse to horse, and man to man they fight,
Not rabid wolves more fierce contest their prey;
Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the day.
Discord with joy the scene of death descries,
And drinks large slaughter at her sanguine eyes:
Discord alone, of all the immortal train,
Swells the red horrors of this direful plain:
The gods in peace their golden mansions fill,
Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill:
But general murmurs told their griefs above,
And each accused the partial will of Jove.
Meanwhile apart, superior, and alone,
The eternal Monarch, on his awful throne,
Wrapt in the blaze of boundless glory sate;
And fixâd, fulfillâd the just decrees of fate.
On earth he turnâd his all-considering eyes,
And markâd the spot where Ilionâs towers arise;
The sea with ships, the fields with armies spread,
The victorâs rage, the dying, and the dead.

Thus while the morning-beams, increasing bright,
Oâer heavenâs pure azure spread the glowing light,
Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But now (what time in some sequesterâd vale
The weary woodman spreads his sparing meal,
When his tired arms refuse the axe to rear,
And claim a respite from the sylvan war;
But not till half the prostrate forests lay
Stretchâd in long ruin, and exposed to day)
Then, nor till then, the Greeksâ impulsive might
Pierced the black phalanx, and let in the light.
Great Agamemnon then the slaughter led,
And slew Bienor at his peopleâs head:
Whose squire Oileus, with a sudden spring,
Leapâd from the chariot to revenge his king;
But in his front he felt the fatal wound,
Which pierced his brain, and stretchâd him on the ground.
Atrides spoilâd, and left them on the plain:
Vain was their youth, their glittering armour vain:
Now soilâd with dust, and naked to the sky,
Their snowy limbs and beauteous bodies lie.

Two sons of Priam next to battle move,
The product, one of marriage, one of love:[222]
In the same car the brother-warriors ride;
This took the charge to combat, that to guide:
Far other task, than when they wont to keep,
On Idaâs tops, their fatherâs fleecy sheep.
These on the mountains once Achilles found,
And captive led, with pliant osiers bound;
Then to their sire for ample sums restored;
But now to perish by Atridesâ sword:
Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds:
Cleft through the head his brotherâs fate succeeds,
Swift to the spoil the hasty victor falls,
And, stript, their features to his mind recalls.
The Trojans see the youths untimely die,
But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
So when a lion ranging oâer the lawns,
Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns,
Their bones he cracks, their reeking vitals draws,
And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody jaws;
The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay,
But swift through rustling thickets bursts her way;
All drownâd in sweat, the panting mother flies,
And the big tears roll trickling from her eyes.

Amidst the tumult of the routed train,
The sons of false Antimachus were slain;
He who for bribes his faithless counsels sold,
And voted Helenâs stay for Parisâ gold.
Atrides markâd, as these their safety sought,
And slew the children for the fatherâs fault;
Their headstrong horse unable to restrain,
They shook with fear, and droppâd the silken rein;
Then in the chariot on their knees they fall,
And thus with lifted hands for mercy call:

âO spare our youth, and for the life we owe,
Antimachus shall copious gifts bestow:
Soon as he hears, that, not in battle slain,
The Grecian ships his captive sons detain,
Large heaps of brass in ransom shall be told,
And steel well-tempered, and persuasive gold.â

These words, attended with the flood of tears,
The youths addressâd to unrelenting ears:
The vengeful monarch gave this stern reply:
âIf from Antimachus ye spring, ye die;
The daring wretch who once in council stood
To shed Ulyssesâ and my brotherâs blood,
For profferâd peace! and sues his seed for grace?
No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race.â

This said, Pisander from the car he cast,
And pierced his breast: supine he breathed his last.
His brother leapâd to earth; but, as he lay,
The trenchant falchion loppâd his hands away;
His severâd head was tossâd among the throng,
And, rolling, drew a bloody train along.
Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew;
The kingâs example all his Greeks pursue.
Now by the foot the flying foot were slain,
Horse trod by horse, lay foaming on the plain.
From the dry fields thick clouds of dust arise,
Shade the black host, and intercept the skies.
The brass-hoofâd steeds tumultuous plunge and bound,
And the thick thunder beats the labouring ground,
Still slaughtering on, the king of men proceeds;
The distanced army wonders at his deeds,
As when the winds with raging flames conspire,
And oâer the forests roll the flood of fire,
In blazing heaps the groveâs old honours fall,
And one refulgent ruin levels all:
Before Atridesâ rage so sinks the foe,
Whole squadrons vanish, and proud heads lie low.
The steeds fly trembling from his waving sword,
And many a car, now lighted of its lord,
Wide oâer the field with guideless fury rolls,
Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls;
While his keen falchion drinks the warriorsâ lives;
More grateful, now, to vultures than their wives!

Perhaps great Hector then had found his fate,
But Jove and destiny prolongâd his date.
Safe from the darts, the care of heaven he stood,
Amidst alarms, and death, and dust, and blood.

Now past the tomb where ancient Ilus lay,
Through the mid field the routed urge their way:
Where the wild figs the adjoining summit crown,
The path they take, and speed to reach the town.
As swift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued,
Hot with his toil, and bathed in hostile blood.
Now near the beech-tree, and the Scaean gates,
The hero halts, and his associates waits.
Meanwhile on every side around the plain,
Dispersed, disorderâd, fly the Trojan train.
So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismayâd
The lionâs roaring through the midnight shade;
On heaps they tumble with successless haste;
The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.
Not with less fury stern Atrides flew,
Still pressâd the rout, and still the hindmost slew;
Hurlâd from their cars the bravest chiefs are killâd,
And rage, and death, and carnage load the field.

Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall;
Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills,
And down their summits pourâd a hundred rills:
The unkindled lightning in his hand he took,
And thus the many-coloured maid bespoke:

âIris, with haste thy golden wings display,
To godlike Hector this our word conveyâ
While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
Bid him give way; but issue forth commands,
And trust the war to less important hands:
But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
That chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
Then Jove shall string his arm, and fire his breast,
Then to her ships shall flying Greece be pressâd,
Till to the main the burning sun descend,
And sacred night her awful shade extend.â

He spoke, and Iris at his word obeyâd;
On wings of winds descends the various maid.
The chief she found amidst the ranks of war,
Close to the bulwarks, on his glittering car.
The goddess then: âO son of Priam, hear!
From Jove I come, and his high mandate bear.
While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
Abstain from fight; yet issue forth commands,
And trust the war to less important hands:
But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
The chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
Then Jove shall string thy arm, and fire thy breast,
Then to her ships shall flying Greece be pressâd,
Till to the main the burning sun descend,
And sacred night her awful shade extend.â

She said, and vanishâd. Hector, with a bound,
Springs from his chariot on the trembling ground,
In clanging arms: he grasps in either hand
A pointed lance, and speeds from band to band;
Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
They stand to arms: the Greeks their onset dare,
Condense their powers, and wait the coming war.
New force, new spirit, to each breast returns;
The fight renewâd with fiercer fury burns:
The king leads on: all fix on him their eye,
And learn from him to conquer, or to die.

Ye sacred nine! celestial Muses! tell,
Who faced him first, and by his prowess fell?
The great Iphidamas, the bold and young,
From sage Antenor and Theano sprung;
Whom from his youth his grandsire Cisseus bred,
And nursed in Thrace where snowy flocks are fed.
Scarce did the down his rosy cheeks invest,
And early honour warm his generous breast,
When the kind sire consignâd his daughterâs charms
(Theanoâs sister) to his youthful arms.
But callâd by glory to the wars of Troy,
He leaves untasted the first fruits of joy;
From his loved bride departs with melting eyes,
And swift to aid his dearer country flies.
With twelve black ships he reachâd Percopeâs strand,
Thence took the long laborious march by land.
Now fierce for fame, before the ranks he springs,
Towering in arms, and braves the king of kings.
Atrides first discharged the missive spear;
The Trojan stoopâd, the javelin passâd in air.
Then near the corslet, at the monarchâs heart,
With all his strength, the youth directs his dart:
But the broad belt, with plates of silver bound,
The point rebated, and repellâd the wound.
Encumberâd with the dart, Atrides stands,
Till, graspâd with force, he wrenchâd it from his hands;
At once his weighty sword discharged a wound
Full on his neck, that fellâd him to the ground.
Stretchâd in the dust the unhappy warrior lies,
And sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes.
Oh worthy better fate! oh early slain!
Thy countryâs friend; and virtuous, though in vain!
No more the youth shall join his consortâs side,
At once a virgin, and at once a bride!
No more with presents her embraces meet,
Or lay the spoils of conquest at her feet,
On whom his passion, lavish of his store,
Bestowâd so much, and vainly promised more!
Unwept, uncoverâd, on the plain he lay,
While the proud victor bore his arms away.

Coon, Antenorâs eldest hope, was nigh:
Tears, at the sight, came starting from his eye,
While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he viewâd,
And the pale features now deformâd with blood.
Then, with his spear, unseen, his time he took,
Aimâd at the king, and near his elbow strook.
The thrilling steel transpierced the brawny part,
And through his arm stood forth the barbed dart.
Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fear
On Coon rushes with his lifted spear:
His brotherâs corpse the pious Trojan draws,
And calls his country to assert his cause;
Defends him breathless on the sanguine field,
And oâer the body spreads his ample shield.
Atrides, marking an unguarded part,
Transfixâd the warrior with his brazen dart;
Prone on his brotherâs bleeding breast he lay,
The monarchâs falchion loppâd his head away:
The social shades the same dark journey go,
And join each other in the realms below.

The vengeful victor rages round the fields,
With every weapon art or fury yields:
By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone,
Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops oâerthrown.
This, while yet warm distillâd the purple flood;
But when the wound grew stiff with clotted blood,
Then grinding tortures his strong bosom rend,
Less keen those darts the fierce Ilythiae send:
(The powers that cause the teeming matronâs throes,
Sad mothers of unutterable woes!)
Stung with the smart, all-panting with the pain,
He mounts the car, and gives his squire the rein;
Then with a voice which fury made more strong,
And pain augmented, thus exhorts the throng:

âO friends! O Greeks! assert your honours won;
Proceed, and finish what this arm begun:
Lo! angry Jove forbids your chief to stay,
And envies half the glories of the day.â

He said: the driver whirls his lengthful thong;
The horses fly; the chariot smokes along.
Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow,
And from their sides the foam descends in snow;
Shot through the battle in a momentâs space,
The wounded monarch at his tent they place.

No sooner Hector saw the king retired,
But thus his Trojans and his aids he fired:
âHear, all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian race!
Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face:
Now call to mind your ancient trophies won,
Your great forefathersâ virtues, and your own.
Behold, the general flies! deserts his powers!
Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest ours!
Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds;
And, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds.â

With words like these the fiery chief alarms
His fainting host, and every bosom warms.
As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tear
The brindled lion, or the tusky bear:
With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart,
And springs the foremost with his lifted dart:
So godlike Hector prompts his troops to dare;
Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war.
On the black body of the foe he pours;
As from the cloudâs deep bosom, swellâd with showers,
A sudden storm the purple ocean sweeps,
Drives the wild waves, and tosses all the deeps.
Say, Muse! when Jove the Trojanâs glory crownâd,
Beneath his arm what heroes bit the ground?
Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died,
Opites next was added to their side;
Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight,
Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless night;
Ãsymnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name;
The rest were vulgar deaths unknown to fame.
As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms,
Dispels the gatherâd clouds that Notus forms:
The gust continued, violent and strong,
Rolls sable clouds in heaps on heaps along;
Now to the skies the foaming billows rears,
Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares:
Thus, raging Hector, with resistless hands,
Oâerturns, confounds, and scatters all their bands.
Now the last ruin the whole host appals;
Now Greece had trembled in her wooden walls;
But wise Ulysses callâd Tydides forth,
His soul rekindled, and awaked his worth.
âAnd stand we deedless, O eternal shame!
Till Hectorâs arm involve the ships in flame?
Haste, let us join, and combat side by side.â
The warrior thus, and thus the friend replied:

âNo martial toil I shun, no danger fear;
Let Hector come; I wait his fury here.
But Jove with conquest crowns the Trojan train:
And, Jove our foe, all human force is vain.â

He sighâd; but, sighing, raised his vengeful steel,
And from his car the proud Thymbraeus fell:
Molion, the charioteer, pursued his lord,
His death ennobled by Ulyssesâ sword.
There slain, they left them in eternal night,
Then plunged amidst the thickest ranks of fight.
So two wild boars outstrip the following hounds,
Then swift revert, and wounds return for wounds.
Stern Hectorâs conquests in the middle plain
Stood checkâd awhile, and Greece respired again.

The sons of Merops shone amidst the war;
Towering they rode in one refulgent car:
In deep prophetic arts their father skillâd,
Had warnâd his children from the Trojan field.
Fate urged them on: the father warnâd in vain;
They rushâd to fight, and perishâd on the plain;
Their breasts no more the vital spirit warms;
The stern Tydides strips their shining arms.
Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies,
And rich Hippodamus becomes his prize.
Great Jove from Ide with slaughter fills his sight,
And level hangs the doubtful scale of fight.
By Tydeusâ lance Agastrophus was slain,
The far-famed hero of Paeonian strain;
Wingâd with his fears, on foot he strove to fly,
His steeds too distant, and the foe too nigh:
Through broken orders, swifter than the wind,
He fled, but flying left his life behind.
This Hector sees, as his experienced eyes
Traverse the files, and to the rescue flies;
Shouts, as he passâd, the crystal regions rend,
And moving armies on his march attend.
Great Diomed himself was seized with fear,
And thus bespoke his brother of the war:

âMark how this way yon bending squadrons yield!
The storm rolls on, and Hector rules the field:
Here stand his utmost force.ââThe warrior said;
Swift at the word his ponderous javelin fled;
Nor missâd its aim, but where the plumage danced
Razed the smooth cone, and thence obliquely glanced.
Safe in his helm (the gift of PhÅbusâ hands)
Without a wound the Trojan hero stands;
But yet so stunnâd, that, staggering on the plain.
His arm and knee his sinking bulk sustain;
Oâer his dim sight the misty vapours rise,
And a short darkness shades his swimming eyes.
Tydides followed to regain his lance;
While Hector rose, recoverâd from the trance,
Remounts his car, and herds amidst the crowd:
The Greek pursues him, and exults aloud:
âOnce more thank PhÅbus for thy forfeit breath,
Or thank that swiftness which outstrips the death.
Well by Apollo are thy prayers repaid,
And oft that partial power has lent his aid.
Thou shall not long the death deserved withstand,
If any god assist Tydidesâ hand.
Fly then, inglorious! but thy flight, this day,
Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay,â

Him, while he triumphâd, Paris eyed from far,
(The spouse of Helen, the fair cause of war;)
Around the fields his featherâd shafts he sent,
From ancient Ilusâ ruinâd monument:
Behind the column placed, he bent his bow,
And wingâd an arrow at the unwary foe;
Just as he stoopâd, Agastrophusâs crest
To seize, and drew the corslet from his breast,
The bowstring twangâd; nor flew the shaft in vain,
But pierced his foot, and nailâd it to the plain.
The laughing Trojan, with a joyful spring.
Leaps from his ambush, and insults the king.

âHe bleeds! (he cries) some god has sped my dart!
Would the same god had fixâd it in his heart!
So Troy, relieved from that wide-wasting hand,
Should breathe from slaughter and in combat stand:
Whose sons now tremble at his darted spear,
As scatterâd lambs the rushing lion fear.â

He dauntless thus: âThou conqueror of the fair,
Thou woman-warrior with the curling hair;
Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart,
Unskillâd in arms to act a manly part!
Thou hast but done what boys or women can;
Such hands may wound, but not incense a man.
Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave,
A cowardâs weapon never hurts the brave.
Not so this dart, which thou mayâst one day feel;
Fate wings its flight, and death is on the steel:
Where this but lights, some noble life expires;
Its touch makes orphans, bathes the cheeks of sires,
Steeps earth in purple, gluts the birds of air,
And leaves such objects as distract the fair.â
Ulysses hastens with a trembling heart,
Before him steps, and bending draws the dart:
Forth flows the blood; an eager pang succeeds;
Tydides mounts, and to the navy speeds.

Now on the field Ulysses stands alone,
The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on;
But stands collected in himself, and whole,
And questions thus his own unconquerâd soul:

âWhat further subterfuge, what hopes remain?
What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain?
What danger, singly if I stand the ground,
My friends all scatterâd, all the foes around?
Yet wherefore doubtful? let this truth suffice,
The brave meets danger, and the coward flies.
To die or conquer, proves a heroâs heart;
And, knowing this, I know a soldierâs part.â

Such thoughts revolving in his careful breast,
Near, and more near, the shady cohorts pressâd;
These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose;
And round him deep the steely circle grows.
So fares a boar whom all the troop surrounds
Of shouting huntsmen and of clamorous hounds;
He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with ire;
His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire;
By these, by those, on every part is plied;
And the red slaughter spreads on every side.
Pierced through the shoulder, first Deiopis fell;
Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell;
Chersidamas, beneath the navel thrust,
Falls prone to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
Charops, the son of Hippasus, was near;
Ulysses reachâd him with the fatal spear;
But to his aid his brother Socus flies,
Socus the brave, the generous, and the wise.
Near as he drew, the warrior thus began:

âO great Ulysses! much-enduring man!
Not deeper skillâd in every martial sleight,
Than worn to toils, and active in the fight!
This day two brothers shall thy conquest grace,
And end at once the great Hippasian race,
Or thou beneath this lance must press the field.â
He said, and forceful pierced his spacious shield:
Through the strong brass the ringing javelin thrown,
Ploughâd half his side, and bared it to the bone.
By Pallasâ care, the spear, though deep infixâd,
Stoppâd short of life, nor with his entrails mixâd.

The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew,
Then furious thus (but first some steps withdrew):
âUnhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace,
Fate calls thee hence and finishâd is thy race.
Nor longer check my conquests on the foe;
But, pierced by this, to endless darkness go,
And add one spectre to the realms below!â

He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright,
Trembling gave way, and turnâd his back to flight;
Between his shoulders pierced the following dart,
And held its passage through the panting heart:
Wide in his breast appearâd the grisly wound;
He falls; his armour rings against the ground.
Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain:
âFamed son of Hippasus! there press the plain;
There ends thy narrow span assignâd by fate,
Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.
Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose;
Thy dying eyes no tender mother close;
But hungry birds shall tear those balls away,
And hovering vultures scream around their prey.
Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom,
With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb.â

Then raging with intolerable smart,
He writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued,
And gladdenâd Troy with sight of hostile blood.
Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade,
Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.
Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears;
The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears:
Alarmâd, to Ajax Telamon he cried,
Who shares his labours, and defends his side:
âO friend! Ulyssesâ shouts invade my ear;
Distressed he seems, and no assistance near;
Strong as he is, yet one opposed to all,
Oppressâd by multitudes, the best may fall.
Greece robbâd of him must bid her host despair,
And feel a loss not ages can repair.â

Then, where the cry directs, his course he bends;
Great Ajax, like the god of war, attends,
The prudent chief in sore distress they found,
With bands of furious Trojans compassâd round.[223]
As when some huntsman, with a flying spear,
From the blind thicket wounds a stately deer;
Down his cleft side, while fresh the blood distils,
He bounds aloft, and scuds from hills to hills,
Till lifeâs warm vapour issuing through the wound,
Wild mountain-wolves the fainting beast surround:
Just as their jaws his prostrate limbs invade,
The lion rushes through the woodland shade,
The wolves, though hungry, scour dispersed away;
The lordly savage vindicates his prey.
Ulysses thus, unconquerâd by his pains,
A single warrior half a host sustains:
But soon as Ajax leaves his tower-like shield,
The scattered crowds fly frighted oâer the field;
Atridesâ arm the sinking hero stays,
And, saved from numbers, to his car conveys.

Victorious Ajax plies the routed crew;
And first Doryclus, Priamâs son, he slew,
On strong Pandocus next inflicts a wound,
And lays Lysander bleeding on the ground.
As when a torrent, swellâd with wintry rains,
Pours from the mountains oâer the deluged plains,
And pines and oaks, from their foundations torn,
A countryâs ruins! to the seas are borne:
Fierce Ajax thus oâerwhelms the yielding throng;
Men, steeds, and chariots, roll in heaps along.

But Hector, from this scene of slaughter far,
Raged on the left, and ruled the tide of war:
Loud groans proclaim his progress through the plain,
And deep Scamander swells with heaps of slain.
There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose
The warriorâs fury; there the battle glows;
There fierce on foot, or from the chariotâs height,
His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight.
The spouse of Helen, dealing darts around,
Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound:
In his right shoulder the broad shaft appearâd,
And trembling Greece for her physician fearâd.
To Nestor then Idomeneus begun:
âGlory of Greece, old Neleusâ valiant son!
Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away,
And great Machaon to the ships convey;
A wise physician skillâd our wounds to heal,
Is more than armies to the public weal.â
Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rode
The wounded offspring of the healing god.
He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feet
Shake the dry field, and thunder toward the fleet.

But now Cebriones, from Hectorâs car,
Surveyâd the various fortune of the war:
âWhile here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain,
Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain.
Before great Ajax see the mingled throng
Of men and chariots driven in heaps along!
I know him well, distinguishâd oâer the field
By the broad glittering of the sevenfold shield.
Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds,
There danger calls, and there the combat bleeds;
There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite,
And groans of slaughter mix with shouts of fight.â

Thus having spoke, the driverâs lash resounds;
Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds;
Stung by the stroke, the coursers scour the fields,
Oâer heaps of carcases, and hills of shields.
The horsesâ hoofs are bathed in heroesâ gore,
And, dashing, purple all the car before;
The groaning axle sable drops distils,
And mangled carnage clogs the rapid wheels.
Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight,
Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light:
(By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone,
The ranks he scatterâd and the troops oâerthrown:)
Ajax he shuns, through all the dire debate,
And fears that arm whose force he felt so late.
But partial Jove, espousing Hectorâs part,
Shot heaven-bred horror through the Grecianâs heart;
Confused, unnerved in Hectorâs presence grown,
Amazed he stood, with terrors not his own.
Oâer his broad back his moony shield he threw,
And, glaring round, by tardy steps withdrew.
Thus the grim lion his retreat maintains,
Beset with watchful dogs, and shouting swains;
Repulsed by numbers from the nightly stalls,
Though rage impels him, and though hunger calls,
Long stands the showering darts, and missile fires;
Then sourly slow the indignant beast retires:
So turnâd stern Ajax, by whole hosts repellâd,
While his swoln heart at every step rebellâd.

As the slow beast, with heavy strength endued,
In some wide field by troops of boys pursued,
Though round his sides a wooden tempest rain,
Crops the tall harvest, and lays waste the plain;
Thick on his hide the hollow blows resound,
The patient animal maintains his ground,
Scarce from the field with all their efforts chased,
And stirs but slowly when he stirs at last:
On Ajax thus a weight of Trojans hung,
The strokes redoubled on his buckler rung;
Confiding now in bulky strength he stands,
Now turns, and backward bears the yielding bands;
Now stiff recedes, yet hardly seems to fly,
And threats his followers with retorted eye.
Fixâd as the bar between two warring powers,
While hissing darts descend in iron showers:
In his broad buckler many a weapon stood,
Its surface bristled with a quivering wood;
And many a javelin, guiltless on the plain,
Marks the dry dust, and thirsts for blood in vain.
But bold Eurypylus his aid imparts,
And dauntless springs beneath a cloud of darts;
Whose eager javelin launchâd against the foe,
Great Apisaon felt the fatal blow;
From his torn liver the red current flowâd,
And his slack knees desert their dying load.
The victor rushing to despoil the dead,
From Parisâ bow a vengeful arrow fled;
Fixâd in his nervous thigh the weapon stood,
Fixâd was the point, but broken was the wood.
Back to the lines the wounded Greek retired,
Yet thus retreating, his associates fired:

âWhat god, O Grecians! has your hearts dismayâd?
Oh, turn to arms; âtis Ajax claims your aid.
This hour he stands the mark of hostile rage,
And this the last brave battle he shall wage:
Haste, join your forces; from the gloomy grave
The warrior rescue, and your country save.â
Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears,
Who spread their bucklers, and advance their spears,
To guard their wounded friend: while thus they stand
With pious care, great Ajax joins the band:
Each takes new courage at the heroâs sight;
The hero rallies, and renews the fight.

Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires,
While Nestorâs chariot far from fight retires:
His coursers steepâd in sweat, and stainâd with gore,
The Greeksâ preserver, great Machaon, bore.
That hour Achilles, from the topmost height
Of his proud fleet, oâerlookâd the fields of fight;
His feasted eyes beheld around the plain
The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.
His friend Machaon singled from the rest,
A transient pity touchâd his vengeful breast.
Straight to Menoetiusâ much-loved son he sent:
Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent;
In evil hour! Then fate decreed his doom,
And fixâd the date of all his woes to come.

âWhy calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay;
Whateâer thy will, Patroclus shall obey.â

âO first of friends! (Pelides thus replied)
Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
The time is come, when yon despairing host
Shall learn the value of the man they lost:
Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan,
And proud Atrides tremble on his throne.
Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught
What wounded warrior late his chariot brought:
For, seen at distance, and but seen behind,
His form recallâd Machaon to my mind;
Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his face,
The coursers passâd me with so swift a pace.â

The hero said. His friend obeyâd with haste,
Through intermingled ships and tents he passâd;
The chiefs descending from their car he found:
The panting steeds Eurymedon unbound.
The warriors standing on the breezy shore,
To dry their sweat, and wash away the gore,
Here paused a moment, while the gentle gale
Conveyâd that freshness the cool seas exhale;
Then to consult on farther methods went,
And took their seats beneath the shady tent.
The draught prescribed, fair Hecamede prepares,
Arsinousâ daughter, graced with golden hairs:
(Whom to his aged arms, a royal slave,
Greece, as the prize of Nestorâs wisdom gave:)
A table first with azure feet she placed;
Whose ample orb a brazen charger graced;
Honey new-pressâd, the sacred flour of wheat,
And wholesome garlic, crownâd the savoury treat,
Next her white hand an antique goblet brings,
A goblet sacred to the Pylian kings
From eldest times: embossâd with studs of gold,
Two feet support it, and four handles hold;
On each bright handle, bending oâer the brink,
In sculptured gold, two turtles seem to drink:
A massy weight, yet heaved with ease by him,
When the brisk nectar overlookâd the brim.
Temperâd in this, the nymph of form divine
Pours a large portion of the Pramnian wine;
With goatâs-milk cheese a flavourous taste bestows,
And last with flour the smiling surface strows:
This for the wounded prince the dame prepares:
The cordial beverage reverend Nestor shares:
Salubrious draughts the warriorsâ thirst allay,
And pleasing conference beguiles the day.

Meantime Patroclus, by Achilles sent,
Unheard approached, and stood before the tent.
Old Nestor, rising then, the hero led
To his high seat: the chief refused and said:

ââTis now no season for these kind delays;
The great Achilles with impatience stays.
To great Achilles this respect I owe;
Who asks, what hero, wounded by the foe,
Was borne from combat by thy foaming steeds?
With grief I see the great Machaon bleeds.
This to report, my hasty course I bend;
Thou knowâst the fiery temper of my friend.â
âCan then the sons of Greece (the sage rejoinâd)
Excite compassion in Achillesâ mind?
Seeks he the sorrows of our host to know?
This is not half the story of our woe.
Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds alone,
Our bravest heroes in the navy groan,
Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed,
And stern Eurypylus, already bleed.
But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain!
Achilles heeds not, but derides our pain:
Even till the flames consume our fleet he stays,
And waits the rising of the fatal blaze.
Chief after chief the raging foe destroys;
Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.
Now the slow course of all-impairing time
Unstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime;
Oh! had I still that strength my youth possessâd,
When this bold arm the Epeian powers oppressâd,
The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led,
And stretchâd the great Itymonaeus dead!
Then from my fury fled the trembling swains,
And ours was all the plunder of the plains:
Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine,
As many goats, as many lowing kine:
And thrice the number of unrivallâd steeds,
All teeming females, and of generous breeds.
These, as my first essay of arms, I won;
Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son.
Thus Elis forced, her long arrears restored,
And shares were parted to each Pylian lord.
The state of Pyle was sunk to last despair,
When the proud Elians first commenced the war:
For Neleusâ sons Alcidesâ rage had slain;
Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain!
Oppressâd, we armâd; and now this conquest gainâd,
My sire three hundred chosen sheep obtainâd.
(That large reprisal he might justly claim,
For prize defrauded, and insulted fame,
When Elisâ monarch, at the public course,
Detainâd his chariot, and victorious horse.)
The rest the people shared; myself surveyâd
The just partition, and due victims paid.
Three days were past, when Elis rose to war,
With many a courser, and with many a car;
The sons of Actor at their armyâs head
(Young as they were) the vengeful squadrons led.
High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands,
Our utmost frontier on the Pylian lands:
Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus flow:
The stream they passâd, and pitchâd their tents below.
Pallas, descending in the shades of night,
Alarms the Pylians and commands the fight.
Each burns for fame, and swells with martial pride,
Myself the foremost; but my sire denied;
Fearâd for my youth, exposed to stern alarms;
And stoppâd my chariot, and detainâd my arms.
My sire denied in vain: on foot I fled
Amidst our chariots; for the goddess led.

âAlong fair Areneâs delightful plain
Soft Minyas rolls his waters to the main:
There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite,
And sheathed in arms, expect the dawning light.
Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame,
To great Alphaeusâ sacred source we came.
There first to Jove our solemn rites were paid;
An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid;
A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull was slain
To the blue monarch of the watery main.
In arms we slept, beside the winding flood,
While round the town the fierce Epeians stood.
Soon as the sun, with all-revealing ray,
Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day.
Bright scenes of arms, and works of war appear;
The nations meet; there Pylos, Elis here.
The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled;
King Augiasâ son, and spouse of Agamede:
(She that all simplesâ healing virtues knew,
And every herb that drinks the morning dew:)
I seized his car, the van of battle led;
The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled.
The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior killâd,
Fierce as the whirlwind now I swept the field:
Full fifty captive chariots graced my train;
Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain.
Then Actorâs sons had died, but Neptune shrouds
The youthful heroes in a veil of clouds.
Oâer heapy shields, and oâer the prostrate throng,
Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all along,
Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes,
Where oâer the vales the Olenian rocks arose;
Till Pallas stoppâd us where Alisium flows.
Even there the hindmost of the rear I slay,
And the same arm that led concludes the day;
Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way.
There to high Jove were public thanks assignâd,
As first of gods; to Nestor, of mankind.
Such then I was, impellâd by youthful blood;
So proved my valour for my countryâs good.

âAchilles with unactive fury glows,
And gives to passion what to Greece he owes.
How shall he grieve, when to the eternal shade
Her hosts shall sink, nor his the power to aid!
O friend! my memory recalls the day,
When, gathering aids along the Grecian sea,
I, and Ulysses, touchâd at Phthiaâs port,
And entered Peleusâ hospitable court.
A bull to Jove he slew in sacrifice,
And pourâd libations on the flaming thighs.
Thyself, Achilles, and thy reverend sire
Menoetius, turnâd the fragments on the fire.
Achilles sees us, to the feast invites;
Social we sit, and share the genial rites.
We then explained the cause on which we came,
Urged you to arms, and found you fierce for fame.
Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave;
Peleus said only this:ââMy son! be brave.â
Menoetius thus: âThough great Achilles shine
In strength superior, and of race divine,
Yet cooler thoughts thy elder years attend;
Let thy just counsels aid, and rule thy friend.â
Thus spoke your father at Thessaliaâs court:
Words now forgot, though now of vast import.
Ah! try the utmost that a friend can say:
Such gentle force the fiercest minds obey;
Some favouring god Achillesâ heart may move;
Though deaf to glory, he may yield to love.
If some dire oracle his breast alarm,
If aught from Heaven withhold his saving arm,
Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
If thou but lead the Myrmidonian line;
Clad in Achillesâ arms, if thou appear,
Proud Troy may tremble, and desist from war;
Pressâd by fresh forces, her oâer-labourâd train
Shall seek their walls, and Greece respire again.â

This touchâd his generous heart, and from the tent
Along the shore with hasty strides he went;
Soon as he came, where, on the crowded strand,
The public mart and courts of justice stand,
Where the tall fleet of great Ulysses lies,
And altars to the guardian gods arise;
There, sad, he met the brave Euaemonâs son,
Large painful drops from all his members run;
An arrowâs head yet rooted in his wound,
The sable blood in circles markâd the ground.
As faintly reeling he confessâd the smart,
Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his heart.
Divine compassion touchâd Patroclusâ breast,
Who, sighing, thus his bleeding friend addressâd:

âAh, hapless leaders of the Grecian host!
Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast?
Is this your fate, to glut the dogs with gore,
Far from your friends, and from your native shore?
Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand?
Resists she yet the raging Hectorâs hand?
Or are her heroes doomâd to die with shame,
And this the period of our wars and fame?â

Eurypylus replies: âNo more, my friend;
Greece is no more! this day her glories end;
Even to the ships victorious Troy pursues,
Her force increasing as her toil renews.
Those chiefs, that used her utmost rage to meet,
Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the fleet.
But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part,
Lead to my ships, and draw this deadly dart;
With lukewarm water wash the gore away;
With healing balms the raging smart allay,
Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy,
Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee.
Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius stands
This hour surrounded by the Trojan bands;
And great Machaon, wounded in his tent,
Now wants that succour which so oft he lent.â

To him the chief: âWhat then remains to do?
The event of things the gods alone can view.
Charged by Achillesâ great command I fly,
And bear with haste the Pylian kingâs reply:
But thy distress this instant claims relief.â
He said, and in his arms upheld the chief.
The slaves their masterâs slow approach surveyâd,
And hides of oxen on the floor displayâd:
There stretchâd at length the wounded hero lay;
Patroclus cut the forky steel away:
Then in his hands a bitter root he bruised;
The wound he washâd, the styptic juice infused.
The closing flesh that instant ceased to glow,
The wound to torture, and the blood to flow.


[Illustration: ] HERCULES




BOOK XII.


ARGUMENT.


THE BATTLE AT THE GRECIAN WALL.


The Greeks having retired into their intrenchments, Hector attempts to
force them; but it proving impossible to pass the ditch, Polydamas
advises to quit their chariots, and manage the attack on foot. The
Trojans follow his counsel; and having divided their army into five
bodies of foot, begin the assault. But upon the signal of an eagle with
a serpent in his talons, which appeared on the left hand of the
Trojans, Polydamas endeavours to withdraw them again. This Hector
opposes, and continues the attack; in which, after many actions,
Sarpedon makes the first breach in the wall. Hector also, casting a
stone of vast size, forces open one of the gates, and enters at the
head of his troops, who victoriously pursue the Grecians even to their
ships.


While thus the heroâs pious cares attend
The cure and safety of his wounded friend,
Trojans and Greeks with clashing shields engage,
And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage.
Nor long the trench or lofty walls oppose;
With gods averse the ill-fated works arose;
Their powers neglected, and no victim slain,
The walls were raised, the trenches sunk in vain.

Without the gods, how short a period stands
The proudest monument of mortal hands!
This stood while Hector and Achilles raged,
While sacred Troy the warring hosts engaged;
But when her sons were slain, her city burnâd,
And what survived of Greece to Greece returnâd;
Then Neptune and Apollo shook the shore,
Then Idaâs summits pourâd their watery store;
Rhesus and Rhodius then unite their rills,
Caresus roaring down the stony hills,
Ãsepus, Granicus, with mingled force,
And Xanthus foaming from his fruitful source;
And gulfy Simois, rolling to the main[224]
Helmets, and shields, and godlike heroes slain:
These, turnâd by PhÅbus from their wonted ways,
Deluged the rampire nine continual days;
The weight of waters saps the yielding wall,
And to the sea the floating bulwarks fall.
Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours,
And half the skies descend in sluicy showers.
The god of ocean, marching stern before,
With his huge trident wounds the trembling shore,
Vast stones and piles from their foundation heaves,
And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves.
Now smoothâd with sand, and levellâd by the flood,
No fragment tells where once the wonder stood;
In their old bounds the rivers roll again,
Shine âtwixt the hills, or wander oâer the plain.[225]

But this the gods in later times perform;
As yet the bulwark stood, and braved the storm;
The strokes yet echoed of contending powers;
War thunderâd at the gates, and blood distainâd the towers.
Smote by the arm of Jove with dire dismay,
Close by their hollow ships the Grecians lay:
Hectorâs approach in every wind they hear,
And Hectorâs fury every moment fear.
He, like a whirlwind, tossâd the scattering throng,
Mingled the troops, and drove the field along.
So âmidst the dogs and huntersâ daring bands,
Fierce of his might, a boar or lion stands;
Armâd foes around a dreadful circle form,
And hissing javelins rain an iron storm:
His powers untamed, their bold assault defy,
And where he turns the rout disperse or die:
He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all,
And if he falls, his courage makes him fall.
With equal rage encompassâd Hector glows;
Exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows.
The panting steeds impatient fury breathe,
And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath;
Just at the brink they neigh, and paw the ground,
And the turf trembles, and the skies resound.
Eager they viewâd the prospect dark and deep,
Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the steep;
The bottom bare, (a formidable show!)
And bristled thick with sharpenâd stakes below.
The foot alone this strong defence could force,
And try the pass impervious to the horse.
This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave,
Restrainâd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

âO thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands!
And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands!
What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find,
The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind?
No pass through those, without a thousand wounds,
No space for combat in yon narrow bounds.
Proud of the favours mighty Jove has shown,
On certain dangers we too rashly run:
If âtis his will our haughty foes to tame,
Oh may this instant end the Grecian name!
Here, far from Argos, let their heroes fall,
And one great day destroy and bury all!
But should they turn, and here oppress our train,
What hopes, what methods of retreat remain?
Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused,
In one promiscuous carnage crushâd and bruised,
All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail,
Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the tale.
Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with speed;
Back from the trenches let your steeds be led;
Then all alighting, wedged in firm array,
Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way.
So Greece shall stoop before our conquering power,
And this (if Jove consent) her fatal hour.â


[Illustration: ] POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR


This counsel pleased: the godlike Hector sprung
Swift from his seat; his clanging armour rung.
The chiefâs example followâd by his train,
Each quits his car, and issues on the plain,
By orders strict the charioteers enjoinâd
Compel the coursers to their ranks behind.
The forces part in five distinguishâd bands,
And all obey their several chiefsâ commands.
The best and bravest in the first conspire,
Pant for the fight, and threat the fleet with fire:
Great Hector glorious in the van of these,
Polydamas, and brave Cebriones.
Before the next the graceful Paris shines,
And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins.
The sons of Priam with the third appear,
Deiphobus, and Helenas the seer;
In arms with these the mighty Asius stood,
Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble blood,
And whom Arisbaâs yellow coursers bore,
The coursers fed on Selleâs winding shore.
Antenorâs sons the fourth battalion guide,
And great Ãneas, born on fountful Ide.
Divine Sarpedon the last band obeyâd,
Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid.
Next him, the bravest, at their armyâs head,
But he more brave than all the hosts he led.

Now with compacted shields in close array,
The moving legions speed their headlong way:
Already in their hopes they fire the fleet,
And see the Grecians gasping at their feet.

While every Trojan thus, and every aid,
The advice of wise Polydamas obeyâd,
Asius alone, confiding in his car,
His vaunted coursers urged to meet the war.
Unhappy hero! and advised in vain;
Those wheels returning neâer shall mark the plain;
No more those coursers with triumphant joy
Restore their master to the gates of Troy!
Black death attends behind the Grecian wall,
And great Idomeneus shall boast thy fall!
Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plain
The flying Grecians strove their ships to gain;
Swift through the wall their horse and chariots passâd,
The gates half-openâd to receive the last.
Thither, exulting in his force, he flies:
His following host with clamours rend the skies:
To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main,
Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!

To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,
Who from the Lapithsâ warlike race descend;
This Polypoetes, great Perithousâ heir,
And that Leonteus, like the god of war.
As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise;
Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies:
Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crownâd,
Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground;
High on the hills appears their stately form,
And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.
So graceful these, and so the shock they stand
Of raging Asius, and his furious band.
Orestes, Acamas, in front appear,
And Ånomaus and Thoon close the rear:
In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields,
In vain around them beat their hollow shields;
The fearless brothers on the Grecians call,
To guard their navies, and defend the wall.
Even when they saw Troyâs sable troops impend,
And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend,
Forth from the portals rushâd the intrepid pair,
Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war.
So two wild boars spring furious from their den,
Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men;
On every side the crackling trees they tear,
And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare;
They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll,
Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul.
Around their heads the whistling javelins sung,
With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung;
Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers
Maintainâd the walls, and mannâd the lofty towers:
To save their fleet their last efforts they try,
And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly.

As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings
The dreary winter on his frozen wings;
Beneath the low-hung clouds the sheets of snow
Descend, and whiten all the fields below:
So fast the darts on either army pour,
So down the rampires rolls the rocky shower:
Heavy, and thick, resound the batterâd shields,
And the deaf echo rattles round the fields.

With shame repulsed, with grief and fury driven,
The frantic Asius thus accuses Heaven:
âIn powers immortal who shall now believe?
Can those too flatter, and can Jove deceive?
What man could doubt but Troyâs victorious power
Should humble Greece, and this her fatal hour?
But like when wasps from hollow crannies drive,
To guard the entrance of their common hive,
Darkening the rock, while with unwearied wings
They strike the assailants, and infix their stings;
A race determined, that to death contend:
So fierce these Greeks their last retreats defend.
Gods! shall two warriors only guard their gates,
Repel an army, and defraud the fates?â

These empty accents mingled with the wind,
Nor moved great Joveâs unalterable mind;
To godlike Hector and his matchless might
Was owed the glory of the destined fight.
Like deeds of arms through all the forts were tried,
And all the gates sustainâd an equal tide;
Through the long walls the stony showers were heard,
The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appearâd.
The spirit of a god my breast inspire,
To raise each act to life, and sing with fire!
While Greece unconquerâd kept alive the war,
Secure of death, confiding in despair;
And all her guardian gods, in deep dismay,
With unassisting arms deplored the day.

Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintain
The dreadful pass, and round them heap the slain.
First Damasus, by Polypoetesâ steel,
Pierced through his helmetâs brazen visor, fell;
The weapon drank the mingled brains and gore!
The warrior sinks, tremendous now no more!
Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their breath:
Nor less Leonteus strews the field with death;
First through the belt Hippomachus he gored,
Then sudden waved his unresisted sword:
Antiphates, as through the ranks he broke,
The falchion struck, and fate pursued the stroke:
Iamenus, Orestes, Menon, bled;
And round him rose a monument of dead.
Meantime, the bravest of the Trojan crew,
Bold Hector and Polydamas, pursue;
Fierce with impatience on the works to fall,
And wrap in rolling flames the fleet and wall.
These on the farther bank now stood and gazed,
By Heaven alarmâd, by prodigies amazed:
A signal omen stoppâd the passing host,
Their martial fury in their wonder lost.
Joveâs bird on sounding pinions beat the skies;
A bleeding serpent of enormous size,
His talons trussâd; alive, and curling round,
He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound:
Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey,
In airy circles wings his painful way,
Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries:
Amidst the host the fallen serpent lies.
They, pale with terror, mark its spires unrollâd,
And Joveâs portent with beating hearts behold.
Then first Polydamas the silence broke,
Long weighâd the signal, and to Hector spoke:

âHow oft, my brother, thy reproach I bear,
For words well meant, and sentiments sincere?
True to those counsels which I judge the best,
I tell the faithful dictates of my breast.
To speak his thoughts is every freemanâs right,
In peace, in war, in council, and in fight;
And all I move, deferring to thy sway,
But tends to raise that power which I obey.
Then hear my words, nor may my words be vain!
Seek not this day the Grecian ships to gain;
For sure, to warn us, Jove his omen sent,
And thus my mind explains its clear event:
The victor eagle, whose sinister flight
Retards our host, and fills our hearts with fright,
Dismissâd his conquest in the middle skies,
Allowâd to seize, but not possess the prize;
Thus, though we gird with fires the Grecian fleet,
Though these proud bulwalks tumble at our feet,
Toils unforeseen, and fiercer, are decreed;
More woes shall follow, and more heroes bleed.
So bodes my soul, and bids me thus advise;
For thus a skilful seer would read the skies.â

To him then Hector with disdain returnâd:
(Fierce as he spoke, his eyes with fury burnâd:)
âAre these the faithful counsels of thy tongue?
Thy will is partial, not thy reason wrong:
Or if the purpose of thy heart thou vent,
Sure heaven resumes the little sense it lent.
What coward counsels would thy madness move
Against the word, the will revealâd of Jove?
The leading sign, the irrevocable nod,
And happy thunders of the favouring god,
These shall I slight, and guide my wavering mind
By wandering birds that flit with every wind?
Ye vagrants of the sky! your wings extend,
Or where the suns arise, or where descend;
To right, to left, unheeded take your way,
While I the dictates of high heaven obey.
Without a sign his sword the brave man draws,
And asks no omen but his countryâs cause.
But why shouldâst thou suspect the warâs success?
None fears it more, as none promotes it less:
Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire,
Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire.
Troy and her sons may find a general grave,
But thou canst live, for thou canst be a slave.
Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests
Spread their cold poison through our soldiersâ breasts,
My javelin can revenge so base a part,
And free the soul that quivers in thy heart.â

Furious he spoke, and, rushing to the wall,
Calls on his host; his host obey the call;
With ardour follow where their leader flies:
Redoubling clamours thunder in the skies.
Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide,
And drifts of dust the clouded navy hide;
He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay,
And gives great Hector the predestined day.
Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid,
Close to the works their rigid siege they laid.
In vain the mounds and massy beams defend,
While these they undermine, and those they rend;
Upheaved the piles that prop the solid wall;
And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall.
Greece on her ramparts stands the fierce alarms;
The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving arms,
Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row;
Whence hissing darts, incessant, rain below.
The bold Ajaces fly from tower to tower,
And rouse, with flame divine, the Grecian power.
The generous impulse every Greek obeys;
Threats urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise.

âFellows in arms! whose deeds are known to fame,
And you, whose ardour hopes an equal name!
Since not alike endued with force or art;
Behold a day when each may act his part!
A day to fire the brave, and warm the cold,
To gain new glories, or augment the old.
Urge those who stand, and those who faint, excite;
Drown Hectorâs vaunts in loud exhorts of fight;
Conquest, not safety, fill the thoughts of all;
Seek not your fleet, but sally from the wall;
So Jove once more may drive their routed train,
And Troy lie trembling in her walls again.â

Their ardour kindles all the Grecian powers;
And now the stones descend in heavier showers.
As when high Jove his sharp artillery forms,
And opes his cloudy magazine of storms;
In winterâs bleak uncomfortable reign,
A snowy inundation hides the plain;
He stills the winds, and bids the skies to sleep;
Then pours the silent tempest thick and deep;
And first the mountain-tops are coverâd oâer,
Then the green fields, and then the sandy shore;
Bent with the weight, the nodding woods are seen,
And one bright waste hides all the works of men:
The circling seas, alone absorbing all,
Drink the dissolving fleeces as they fall:
So from each side increased the stony rain,
And the white ruin rises oâer the plain.

Thus godlike Hector and his troops contend
To force the ramparts, and the gates to rend:
Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield,
Till great Sarpedon towerâd amid the field;
For mighty Jove inspired with martial flame
His matchless son, and urged him on to fame.
In arms he shines, conspicuous from afar,
And bears aloft his ample shield in air;
Within whose orb the thick bull-hides were rollâd,
Ponderous with brass, and bound with ductile gold:
And while two pointed javelins arm his hands,
Majestic moves along, and leads his Lycian bands.

So pressâd with hunger, from the mountainâs brow
Descends a lion on the flocks below;
So stalks the lordly savage oâer the plain,
In sullen majesty, and stern disdain:
In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar,
And shepherds gall him with an iron war;
Regardless, furious, he pursues his way;
He foams, he roars, he rends the panting prey.

Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glows
With generous rage that drives him on the foes.
He views the towers, and meditates their fall,
To sure destruction dooms the aspiring wall;
Then casting on his friend an ardent look,
Fired with the thirst of glory, thus he spoke:

âWhy boast we, Glaucus! our extended reign,[226]
Where Xanthusâ streams enrich the Lycian plain,
Our numerous herds that range the fruitful field,
And hills where vines their purple harvest yield,
Our foaming bowls with purer nectar crownâd,
Our feasts enhanced with musicâs sprightly sound?
Why on those shores are we with joy surveyâd,
Admired as heroes, and as gods obeyâd,
Unless great acts superior merit prove,
And vindicate the bounteous powers above?
âTis ours, the dignity they give to grace;
The first in valour, as the first in place;
That when with wondering eyes our martial bands
Behold our deeds transcending our commands,
Such, they may cry, deserve the sovereign state,
Whom those that envy dare not imitate!
Could all our care elude the gloomy grave,
Which claims no less the fearful and the brave,
For lust of fame I should not vainly dare
In fighting fields, nor urge thy soul to war.
But since, alas! ignoble age must come,
Disease, and deathâs inexorable doom,
The life, which others pay, let us bestow,
And give to fame what we to nature owe;
Brave though we fall, and honourâd if we live,
Or let us glory gain, or glory give!â

He said; his words the listening chief inspire
With equal warmth, and rouse the warriorâs fire;
The troops pursue their leaders with delight,
Rush to the foe, and claim the promised fight.
Menestheus from on high the storm beheld
Threatening the fort, and blackening in the field:
Around the walls he gazed, to view from far
What aid appearâd to avert the approaching war,
And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood,
Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood.
In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields
Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields,
The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound,
Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground.
Then thus to Thoos: âHence with speed (he said),
And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid;
Their strength, united, best may help to bear
The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
Hither the Lycian princes bend their course,
The best and bravest of the hostile force.
But if too fiercely there the foes contend,
Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend,
And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
To share the danger, and repel the foe.â

Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along
The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng,
And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore,
Opposed in combat on the dusty shore.
âYe valiant leaders of our warlike bands!
Your aid (said Thoos) Peteusâ son demands;
Your strength, united, best may help to bear
The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
Thither the Lycian princes bend their course,
The best and bravest of the hostile force.
But if too fiercely, here, the foes contend,
At least, let Telamon those towers defend,
And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
To share the danger, and repel the foe.â

Straight to the fort great Ajax turnâd his care,
And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:
âNow, valiant Lycomede! exert your might,
And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight;
To you I trust the fortune of the field,
Till by this arm the foe shall be repellâd:
That done, expect me to complete the day.
Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away.â
With equal steps bold Teucer pressâd the shore,
Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore.

High on the walls appearâd the Lycian powers,
Like some black tempest gathering round the towers:
The Greeks, oppressâd, their utmost force unite,
Prepared to labour in the unequal fight:
The war renews, mixâd shouts and groans arise;
Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies.
Fierce Ajax first the advancing host invades,
And sends the brave Epicles to the shades,
Sarpedonâs friend. Across the warriorâs way,
Rent from the walls, a rocky fragment lay;
In modern ages not the strongest swain
Could heave the unwieldy burden from the plain:
He poised, and swung it round; then tossâd on high,
It flew with force, and labourâd up the sky;
Full on the Lycianâs helmet thundering down,
The ponderous ruin crushâd his batterâd crown.
As skilful divers from some airy steep
Headlong descend, and shoot into the deep,
So falls Epicles; then in groans expires,
And murmuring to the shades the soul retires.

While to the ramparts daring Glaucus drew,
From Teucerâs hand a winged arrow flew;
The bearded shaft the destined passage found,
And on his naked arm inflicts a wound.
The chief, who fearâd some foeâs insulting boast
Might stop the progress of his warlike host,
Concealâd the wound, and, leaping from his height
Retired reluctant from the unfinishâd fight.
Divine Sarpedon with regret beheld
Disabled Glaucus slowly quit the field;
His beating breast with generous ardour glows,
He springs to fight, and flies upon the foes.
Alcmaon first was doomâd his force to feel;
Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel;
Then from the yawning wound with fury tore
The spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore:
Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
His brazen armour rings against the ground.

Swift to the battlement the victor flies,
Tugs with full force, and every nerve applies:
It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield;
The rolling ruins smoke along the field.
A mighty breach appears; the walls lie bare;
And, like a deluge, rushes in the war.
At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow,
And Ajax sends his javelin at the foe;
Fixâd in his belt the featherâd weapon stood,
And through his buckler drove the trembling wood;
But Jove was present in the dire debate,
To shield his offspring, and avert his fate.
The prince gave back, not meditating flight,
But urging vengeance, and severer fight;
Then raised with hope, and fired with gloryâs charms,
His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.
âO where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast?
Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!
The breach lies open, but your chief in vain
Attempts alone the guarded pass to gain:
Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall:
The force of powerful union conquers all.â

This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew;
They join, they thicken, and the assault renew:
Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare,
And fixâd support the weight of all the war;
Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers,
Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.
As on the confines of adjoining grounds,
Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;
They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
One foot, one inch, of the contended field;
Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;
Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound,
Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound;
The copious slaughter covers all the shore,
And the high ramparts drip with human gore.

As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads,
From side to side the trembling balance nods,
(While some laborious matron, just and poor,
With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,)
Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends
Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:[227]
So stood the war, till Hectorâs matchless might,
With fates prevailing, turnâd the scale of fight.
Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies,
And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
âAdvance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands,
Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!â
They hear, they run; and, gathering at his call,
Raise scaling engines, and ascend the wall:
Around the works a wood of glittering spears
Shoots up, and all the rising host appears.
A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw,
Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
Such men as live in these degenerate days:
Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear
The snowy fleece, he tossâd, and shook in air;
For Jove upheld, and lightenâd of its load
The unwieldy rock, the labour of a god.
Thus armâd, before the folded gates he came,
Of massy substance, and stupendous frame;
With iron bars and brazen hinges strong,
On lofty beams of solid timber hung:
Then thundering through the planks with forceful sway,
Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way,
The folds are shatterâd; from the crackling door
Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar.
Now rushing in, the furious chief appears,
Gloomy as night![228] and shakes two shining spears:
A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came,
And from his eye-balls flashâd the living flame.
He moves a god, resistless in his course,
And seems a match for more than mortal force.
Then pouring after, through the gaping space,
A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place;
The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly;
The shore is heapâd with death, and tumult rends the sky.


[Illustration: ] GREEK ALTAR




BOOK XIII.


ARGUMENT.


THE FOURTH BATTLE CONTINUED, IN WHICH NEPTUNE ASSISTS THE GREEKS: THE
ACTS OF IDOMENEUS.


Neptune, concerned for the loss of the Grecians, upon seeing the
fortification forced by Hector, (who had entered the gate near the
station of the Ajaces,) assumes the shape of Calchas, and inspires
those heroes to oppose him: then, in the form of one of the generals,
encourages the other Greeks who had retired to their vessels. The
Ajaces form their troops in a close phalanx, and put a stop to Hector
and the Trojans. Several deeds of valour are performed; Meriones,
losing his spear in the encounter, repairs to seek another at the tent
of Idomeneus: this occasions a conversation between those two warriors,
who return together to the battle. Idomeneus signalizes his courage
above the rest; he kills Othryoneus, Asius, and Alcathous: Deiphobus
and Ãneas march against him, and at length Idomeneus retires. Menelaus
wounds Helenus, and kills Pisander. The Trojans are repulsed on the
left wing; Hector still keeps his ground against the Ajaces, till,
being galled by the Locrian slingers and archers, Polydamas advises to
call a council of war: Hector approves of his advice, but goes first to
rally the Trojans; upbraids Paris, rejoins Polydamas, meets Ajax again,
and renews the attack.
    The eight-and-twentieth day still continues. The scene is between
    the Grecian wall and the sea-shore.


When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coast
Had fixâd great Hector and his conquering host,
He left them to the fates, in bloody fray
To toil and struggle through the well-fought day.
Then turnâd to Thracia from the field of fight
Those eyes that shed insufferable light,
To where the Mysians prove their martial force,
And hardy Thracians tame the savage horse;
And where the far-famed Hippomolgian strays,
Renownâd for justice and for length of days;[229]
Thrice happy race! that, innocent of blood,
From milk, innoxious, seek their simple food:
Jove sees delighted; and avoids the scene
Of guilty Troy, of arms, and dying men:
No aid, he deems, to either host is given,
While his high law suspends the powers of Heaven.

Meantime the monarch of the watery main
Observed the Thunderer, nor observed in vain.
In Samothracia, on a mountainâs brow,
Whose waving woods oâerhung the deeps below,
He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes
Where Idaâs misty tops confusedly rise;
Below, fair Ilionâs glittering spires were seen;
The crowded ships and sable seas between.
There, from the crystal chambers of the main
Emerged, he sat, and mournâd his Argives slain.
At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung,
Prone down the rocky steep he rushâd along;
Fierce as he passâd, the lofty mountains nod,
The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod,
And felt the footsteps of the immortal god.
From realm to realm three ample strides he took,
And, at the fourth, the distant Ãgae shook.

Far in the bay his shining palace stands,
Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands:
This having reachâd, his brass-hoofâd steeds he reins,
Fleet as the winds, and deckâd with golden manes.
Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold,
Immortal arms of adamant and gold.
He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies,
He sits superior, and the chariot flies:
His whirling wheels the glassy surface sweep;
The enormous monsters rolling oâer the deep
Gambol around him on the watery way,
And heavy whales in awkward measures play;
The sea subsiding spreads a level plain,
Exults, and owns the monarch of the main;
The parting waves before his coursers fly;
The wondering waters leave his axle dry.

Deep in the liquid regions lies a cave,
Between where Tenedos the surges lave,
And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling wave:
There the great ruler of the azure round
Stoppâd his swift chariot, and his steeds unbound,
Fed with ambrosial herbage from his hand,
And linkâd their fetlocks with a golden band,
Infrangible, immortal: there they stay:
The father of the floods pursues his way:
Where, like a tempest, darkening heaven around,
Or fiery deluge that devours the ground,
The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy throng,
Embattled rollâd, as Hector rushâd along:
To the loud tumult and the barbarous cry
The heavens re-echo, and the shores reply:
They vow destruction to the Grecian name,
And in their hopes the fleets already flame.

But Neptune, rising from the seas profound,
The god whose earthquakes rock the solid ground,
Now wears a mortal form; like Calchas seen,
Such his loud voice, and such his manly mien;
His shouts incessant every Greek inspire,
But most the Ajaces, adding fire to fire.


[Illustration: ] NEPTUNE RISING FROM THE SEA


ââTis yours, O warriors, all our hopes to raise:
Oh recollect your ancient worth and praise!
âTis yours to save us, if you cease to fear;
Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.
On other works though Troy with fury fall,
And pour her armies oâer our batterâd wall:
There Greece has strength: but this, this part oâerthrown,
Her strength were vain; I dread for you alone:
Here Hector rages like the force of fire,
Vaunts of his gods, and calls high Jove his sire:
If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,
Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight,
Greece yet may live, her threatenâd fleet maintain:
And Hectorâs force, and Joveâs own aid, be vain.â

Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls,
He touchâd the chiefs, and steelâd their manly souls:
Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,
Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
Then, as a falcon from the rocky height,
Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight,
Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high,
Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky:
Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew;
The wide horizon shut him from their view.

The inspiring god Oileusâ active son
Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon:

âSome god, my friend, some god in human form
Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm.
Not Calchas this, the venerable seer;
Short as he turned, I saw the power appear:
I markâd his parting, and the steps he trod;
His own bright evidence reveals a god.
Even now some energy divine I share,
And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!â

âWith equal ardour (Telamon returns)
My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns;
New rising spirits all my force alarm,
Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm.
This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart;
The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart:
Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet,
And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet.â

Full of the god that urged their burning breast,
The heroes thus their mutual warmth expressâd.
Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired;
Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired,
Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls,
And swarms victorious oâer their yielding walls:
Trembling before the impending storm they lie,
While tears of rage stand burning in their eye.
Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal hour;
But breathe new courage as they feel the power.
Teucer and Leitus first his words excite;
Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight;
Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms renownâd,
And Merion next, the impulsive fury found;
Last Nestorâs son the same bold ardour takes,
While thus the god the martial fire awakes:

âOh lasting infamy, oh dire disgrace
To chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race!
I trusted in the gods, and you, to see
Brave Greece victorious, and her navy free:
Ah, noâthe glorious combat you disclaim,
And one black day clouds all her former fame.
Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey,
Unseen, unthought, till this amazing day!
Fly we at length from Troyâs oft-conquerâd bands?
And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands?
A rout undisciplined, a straggling train,
Not born to glories of the dusty plain;
Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued,
A prey to every savage of the wood:
Shall these, so late who trembled at your name,
Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?
A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
The soldiersâ baseness, or the generalâs fault?
Fools! will ye perish for your leaderâs vice;
The purchase infamy, and life the price?
âTis not your cause, Achillesâ injured fame:
Anotherâs is the crime, but yours the shame.
Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust,
Must you be cowards, if your kingâs unjust?
Prevent this evil, and your country save:
Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame
I waste no anger, for they feel no shame:
But you, the pride, the flower of all our host,
My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!
Nor deem this day, this battle, all you lose;
A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues.
Let each reflect, who prizes fame or breath,
On endless infamy, on instant death:
For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore:
Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall;
The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall.â

These words the Greciansâ fainting hearts inspire,
And listening armies catch the godlike fire.
Fixâd at his post was each bold Ajax found,
With well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round:
So close their order, so disposed their fight,
As Pallasâ self might view with fixâd delight;
Or had the god of war inclined his eyes,
The god of war had ownâd a just surprise.
A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate,
Descending Hector and his battle wait.
An iron scene gleams dreadful oâer the fields,
Armour in armour lockâd, and shields in shields,
Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng,
Helms stuck to helms, and man drove man along.
The floating plumes unnumberâd wave above,
As when an earthquake stirs the nodding grove;
And levellâd at the skies with pointing rays,
Their brandishâd lances at each motion blaze.

Thus breathing death, in terrible array,
The close compacted legions urged their way:
Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
As from some mountainâs craggy forehead torn,
A rockâs round fragment flies, with fury borne,
(Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,)
Precipitate the ponderous mass descends:
From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;
At every shock the crackling wood resounds;
Still gathering force, it smokes; and urged amain,
Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain:
There stopsâso Hector. Their whole force he proved,[230]
Resistless when he raged, and, when he stoppâd, unmoved.

On him the war is bent, the darts are shed,
And all their falchions wave around his head:
Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand retires;
But with repeated shouts his army fires.
âTrojans! be firm; this arm shall make your way
Through yon square body, and that black array:
Stand, and my spear shall rout their scattering power,
Strong as they seem, embattled like a tower;
For he that Junoâs heavenly bosom warms,
The first of gods, this day inspires our arms.â

He said; and roused the soul in every breast:
Urged with desire of fame, beyond the rest,
Forth marchâd Deiphobus; but, marching, held
Before his wary steps his ample shield.
Bold Merion aimâd a stroke (nor aimâd it wide);
The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide;
But pierced not through: unfaithful to his hand,
The point broke short, and sparkled in the sand.
The Trojan warrior, touchâd with timely fear,
On the raised orb to distance bore the spear.
The Greek, retreating, mournâd his frustrate blow,
And cursed the treacherous lance that spared a foe;
Then to the ships with surly speed he went,
To seek a surer javelin in his tent.

Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows,
The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.
By Teucerâs arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds,
The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds.
Ere yet to Troy the sons of Greece were led,
In fair Pedaeusâ verdant pastures bred,
The youth had dwelt, remote from warâs alarms,
And blest in bright Medesicasteâs arms:
(This nymph, the fruit of Priamâs ravishâd joy,
Allied the warrior to the house of Troy:)
To Troy, when glory callâd his arms, he came,
And matchâd the bravest of her chiefs in fame:
With Priamâs sons, a guardian of the throne,
He lived, beloved and honourâd as his own.
Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear:
He groans beneath the Telamonian spear.
As from some far-seen mountainâs airy crown,
Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down,
And soils its verdant tresses on the ground;
So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.
Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead,
From Hectorâs hand a shining javelin fled:
He saw, and shunnâd the death; the forceful dart
Sung on, and pierced Amphimachusâs heart,
Cteatusâ son, of Neptuneâs forceful line;
Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound,
And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
To seize his beamy helm the victor flies,
And just had fastened on the dazzling prize,
When Ajaxâ manly arm a javelin flung;
Full on the shieldâs round boss the weapon rung;
He felt the shock, nor more was doomâd to feel,
Secure in mail, and sheathâd in shining steel.
Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain
The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
Between the leaders of the Athenian line,
(Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies;
Imbrius remains the fierce Ajacesâ prize.
As two grim lions bear across the lawn,
Snatchâd from devouring hounds, a slaughterâd fawn.
In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood,
And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood;
So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead
Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head:
Tossâd like a ball, and whirlâd in air away,
At Hectorâs feet the gory visage lay.

The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,
And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain,
Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands,
And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet,
He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete,
His pensive brow the generous care expressâd
With which a wounded soldier touchâd his breast,
Whom in the chance of war a javelin tore,
And his sad comrades from the battle bore;
Him to the surgeons of the camp he sent:
That office paid, he issued from his tent
Fierce for the fight: to whom the god begun,
In Thoasâ voice, Andraemonâs valiant son,
Who ruled where Calydonâs white rocks arise,
And Pleuronâs chalky cliffs emblaze the skies:

âWhereâs now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast,
Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?â

To whom the king: âOn Greece no blame be thrown;
Arms are her trade, and war is all her own.
Her hardy heroes from the well-fought plains
Nor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains:
âTis heaven, alas! and Joveâs all-powerful doom,
That far, far distant from our native home
Wills us to fall inglorious! Oh, my friend!
Once foremost in the fight, still prone to lend
Or arms or counsels, now perform thy best,
And what thou canst not singly, urge the rest.â

Thus he: and thus the god whose force can make
The solid globeâs eternal basis shake:
âAh! never may he see his native land,
But feed the vultures on this hateful strand,
Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay,
Nor dares to combat on this signal day!
For this, behold! in horrid arms I shine,
And urge thy soul to rival acts with mine.
Together let us battle on the plain;
Two, not the worst; nor even this succour vain:
Not vain the weakest, if their force unite;
But ours, the bravest have confessâd in fight.â

This said, he rushes where the combat burns;
Swift to his tent the Cretan king returns:
From thence, two javelins glittering in his hand,
And clad in arms that lightenâd all the strand,
Fierce on the foe the impetuous hero drove,
Like lightning bursting from the arm of Jove,
Which to pale man the wrath of heaven declares,
Or terrifies the offending world with wars;
In streamy sparkles, kindling all the skies,
From pole to pole the trail of glory flies:
Thus his bright armour oâer the dazzled throng
Gleamâd dreadful, as the monarch flashâd along.

Him, near his tent, Meriones attends;
Whom thus he questions: âEver best of friends!
O say, in every art of battle skillâd,
What holds thy courage from so brave a field?
On some important message art thou bound,
Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound?
Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay,
And glows with prospects of thâ approaching day.â

âO prince! (Meriones replies) whose care
Leads forth the embattled sons of Crete to war;
This speaks my grief: this headless lance I wield;
The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield.â

To whom the Cretan: âEnter, and receive
The wonted weapons; those my tent can give;
Spears I have store, (and Trojan lances all,)
That shed a lustre round the illumined wall,
Though I, disdainful of the distant war,
Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain spear,
Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;
And thence these trophies, and these arms I gain.
Enter, and see on heaps the helmets rollâd,
And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold.â

âNor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils;
We too can boast of no ignoble spoils:
But those my ship contains; whence distant far,
I fight conspicuous in the van of war,
What need I more? If any Greek there be
Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee.â

To this, Idomeneus: âThe fields of fight
Have proved thy valour, and unconquerâd might:
And were some ambush for the foes designâd,
Even there thy courage would not lag behind:
In that sharp service, singled from the rest,
The fear of each, or valour, stands confessâd.
No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows;
He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes:
A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part;
Against his bosom beats his quivering heart;
Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare;
With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair,
And looks a bloodless image of despair!
Not so the braveâstill dauntless, still the same,
Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame:
Composed his thought, determined is his eye,
And fixâd his soul, to conquer or to die:
If aught disturb the tenour of his breast,
âTis but the wish to strike before the rest.

âIn such assays thy blameless worth is known,
And every art of dangerous war thy own.
By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore,
Those wounds were glorious all, and all before;
Such as may teach, âtwas still thy brave delight
Tâoppose thy bosom where thy foremost fight.
But why, like infants, cold to honourâs charms,
Stand we to talk, when glory calls to arms?
Goâfrom my conquerâd spears the choicest take,
And to their owners send them nobly back.â

Swift at the word bold Merion snatchâd a spear
And, breathing slaughter, followâd to the war.
So Mars armipotent invades the plain,
(The wide destroyer of the race of man,)
Terror, his best-beloved son, attends his course,
Armâd with stern boldness, and enormous force;
The pride of haughty warriors to confound,
And lay the strength of tyrants on the ground:
From Thrace they fly, callâd to the dire alarms
Of warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian arms;
Invoked by both, relentless they dispose,
To these glad conquest, murderous rout to those.
So marchâd the leaders of the Cretan train,
And their bright arms shot horror oâer the plain.

Then first spake Merion: âShall we join the right,
Or combat in the centre of the fight?
Or to the left our wonted succour lend?
Hazard and fame all parts alike attend.â

âNot in the centre (Idomen replied:)
Our ablest chieftains the main battle guide;
Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care,
And gallant Teucer deals destruction there,
Skillâd or with shafts to gall the distant field,
Or bear close battle on the sounding shield.
These can the rage of haughty Hector tame:
Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame,
Till Jove himself descends, his bolts to shed,
And hurl the blazing ruin at our head.
Great must he be, of more than human birth,
Nor feed like mortals on the fruits of earth.
Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound,
Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguined ground.
In standing fight he mates Achillesâ force,
Excellâd alone in swiftness in the course.
Then to the left our ready arms apply,
And live with glory, or with glory die.â

He said: and Merion to thâ appointed place,
Fierce as the god of battles, urged his pace.
Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheld
Rush like a fiery torrent oâer the field,
Their force embodied in a tide they pour;
The rising combat sounds along the shore.
As warring winds, in Siriusâ sultry reign,
From different quarters sweep the sandy plain;
On every side the dusty whirlwinds rise,
And the dry fields are lifted to the skies:
Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven,
Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darkenâd heaven.
All dreadful glared the iron face of war,
Bristled with upright spears, that flashâd afar;
Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,
And polishâd arms emblazed the flaming fields:
Tremendous scene! that general horror gave,
But touchâd with joy the bosoms of the brave.

Saturnâs great sons in fierce contention vied,
And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won
To crown with glory Peleusâ godlike son,
Willâd not destruction to the Grecian powers,
But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers;
While Neptune, rising from his azure main,
Warrâd on the king of heaven with stern disdain,
And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
Alike divine, and heaven their native place;
But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,
And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
For this, of Joveâs superior might afraid,
Neptune in human form concealâd his aid.
These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train
In war and discordâs adamantine chain,
Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie
Is stretchâd on both, and close compellâd they die.

Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,
The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,
Swellâd with false hopes, with mad ambition vain;
Callâd by the voice of war to martial fame,
From high Cabesusâ distant walls he came;
Cassandraâs love he sought, with boasts of power,
And promised conquest was the profferâd dower.
The king consented, by his vaunts abused;
The king consented, but the fates refused.
Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride,
The field he measured with a larger stride.
Him as he stalkâd, the Cretan javelin found;
Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound:
His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell;
His arms resounded as the boaster fell.
The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead;
âAnd thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped!
Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring,
And such the contract of the Phrygian king!
Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive;
For such an aid what will not Argos give?
To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces join,
And count Atridesâ fairest daughter thine.
Meantime, on further methods to advise,
Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies;
There hear what Greece has on her part to say.â
He spoke, and draggâd the gory corse away.
This Asius viewâd, unable to contain,
Before his chariot warring on the plain:
(His crowded coursers, to his squire consignâd,
Impatient panted on his neck behind:)
To vengeance rising with a sudden spring,
He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king.
The wary Cretan, as his foe drew near,
Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear:
Beneath the chin the point was seen to glide,
And glitterâd, extant at the further side.
As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall,
Or pine, fit mast for some great admiral,
Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound,
Then spreads a length of ruin oâer the ground:
So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day,
And stretchâd before his much-loved coursers lay.
He grinds the dust distainâd with streaming gore,
And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore.
Deprived of motion, stiff with stupid fear,
Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer,
Nor shuns the foe, nor turns the steeds away,
But falls transfixâd, an unresisting prey:
Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath
The stately car, and labours out his breath.
Thus Asiusâ steeds (their mighty master gone)
Remain the prize of Nestorâs youthful son.

Stabbâd at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh,
And made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly.
The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glance
From his slope shield the disappointed lance.
Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round,
Thick with bull-hides and brazen orbits bound,
On his raised arm by two strong braces stayâd,)
He lay collected in defensive shade.
Oâer his safe head the javelin idly sung,
And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung.
Even then the spear the vigorous arm confessâd,
And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenorâs breast:
Warmâd in his liver, to the ground it bore
The chief, his peopleâs guardian now no more!

âNot unattended (the proud Trojan cries)
Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies:
For thee, through hellâs black portals stand displayâd,
This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade.â

Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast,
Touchâd every Greek, but Nestorâs son the most.
Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend,
And his broad buckler shields his slaughterâd friend:
Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore
His honourâd body to the tented shore.

Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws;
Resolved to perish in his countryâs cause,
Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom
To wail his fate in deathâs eternal gloom.
He sees Alcathous in the front aspire:
Great Ãsyetes was the heroâs sire;
His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair,
Anchisesâ eldest hope, and darling care:
Who charmâd her parentsâ and her husbandâs heart
With beauty, sense, and every work of art:
He once of Ilionâs youth the loveliest boy,
The fairest she of all the fair of Troy.
By Neptune now the hapless hero dies,
Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes,
And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet
His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
Fixâd as some column, or deep-rooted oak,
While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.
Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields,
Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.
The riven armour sends a jarring sound;
His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound,
The long lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound;
Fast flowing from its source, as prone he lay,
Lifeâs purple tide impetuous gushâd away.

Then Idomen, insulting oâer the slain:
âBehold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain:
See! on one Greek three Trojan ghosts attend;
This, my third victim, to the shades I send.
Approaching now thy boasted might approve,
And try the prowess of the seed of Jove.
From Jove, enamourâd of a mortal dame,
Great Minos, guardian of his country, came:
Deucalion, blameless prince, was Minosâ heir;
His first-born I, the third from Jupiter:
Oâer spacious Crete, and her bold sons, I reign,
And thence my ships transport me through the main:
Lord of a host, oâer all my host I shine,
A scourge to thee, thy father, and thy line.â

The Trojan heard; uncertain or to meet,
Alone, with venturous arms the king of Crete,
Or seek auxiliar force; at length decreed
To call some hero to partake the deed,
Forthwith Ãneas rises to his thought:
For him in Troyâs remotest lines he sought,
Where he, incensed at partial Priam, stands,
And sees superior posts in meaner hands.
To him, ambitious of so great an aid,
The bold Deiphobus approachâd, and said:

âNow, Trojan prince, employ thy pious arms,
If eâer thy bosom felt fair honourâs charms.
Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend;
Come, and the warriorâs loved remains defend.
Beneath his cares thy early youth was trainâd,
One table fed you, and one roof containâd.
This deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe;
Haste, and revenge it on thâ insulting foe.â

Ãneas heard, and for a space resignâd
To tender pity all his manly mind;
Then rising in his rage, he burns to fight:
The Greek awaits him with collected might.
As the fell boar, on some rough mountainâs head,
Armâd with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred,
When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,
Attends the tumult, and expects the war;
Oâer his bent back the bristly horrors rise;
Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,
His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:
So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook,
And met the Trojan with a lowering look.
Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near,
The youthful offspring of the god of war,
Merion, and Aphareus, in field renownâd:
To these the warrior sent his voice around.
âFellows in arms! your timely aid unite;
Lo, great Ãneas rushes to the fight:
Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold;
He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.
Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife,
The great dispute, of glory, or of life.â

He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obeyâd;
Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade
Around the chief. Ãneas too demands
Thâ assisting forces of his native bands;
Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;
(Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;)
In order follow all thâ embodied train,
Like Idaâs flocks proceeding oâer the plain;
Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,
Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold.
With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads
To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads:
So joys Ãneas, as his native band
Moves on in rank, and stretches oâer the land.

Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose;
On every side the steely circle grows;
Now batterâd breast-plates and hackâd helmets ring,
And oâer their heads unheeded javelins sing.
Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear,
There great Idomeneus, Ãneas here.
Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood,
And burnâd to drench the ground with mutual blood.
The Trojan weapon whizzâd along in air;
The Cretan saw, and shunnâd the brazen spear:
Sent from an arm so strong, the missive wood
Stuck deep in earth, and quiverâd where it stood.
But OEnomas received the Cretanâs stroke;
The forceful spear his hollow corslet broke,
It rippâd his belly with a ghastly wound,
And rollâd the smoking entrails on the ground.
Stretchâd on the plain, he sobs away his breath,
And, furious, grasps the bloody dust in death.
The victor from his breast the weapon tears;
His spoils he could not, for the shower of spears.
Though now unfit an active war to wage,
Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff with cold age,
His listless limbs unable for the course,
In standing fight he yet maintains his force;
Till faint with labour, and by foes repellâd,
His tired slow steps he drags from off the field.
Deiphobus beheld him as he passâd,
And, fired with hate, a parting javelin cast:
The javelin errâd, but held its course along,
And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young:
The son of Mars fell gasping on the ground,
And gnashâd the dust, all bloody with his wound.

Nor knew the furious father of his fall;
High-throned amidst the great Olympian hall,
On golden clouds thâ immortal synod sate;
Detainâd from bloody war by Jove and Fate.

Now, where in dust the breathless hero lay,
For slain Ascalaphus commenced the fray,
Deiphobus to seize his helmet flies,
And from his temples rends the glittering prize;
Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near,
And on his loaded arm discharged his spear:
He drops the weight, disabled with the pain;
The hollow helmet rings against the plain.
Swift as a vulture leaping on his prey,
From his torn arm the Grecian rent away
The reeking javelin, and rejoinâd his friends.
His wounded brother good Polites tends;
Around his waist his pious arms he threw,
And from the rage of battle gently drew:
Him his swift coursers, on his splendid car,
Rapt from the lessening thunder of the war;
To Troy they drove him, groaning from the shore,
And sprinkling, as he passâd, the sands with gore.

Meanwhile fresh slaughter bathes the sanguine ground,
Heaps fall on heaps, and heaven and earth resound.
Bold Aphareus by great Ãneas bled;
As toward the chief he turnâd his daring head,
He pierced his throat; the bending head, depressâd
Beneath his helmet, nods upon his breast;
His shield reversed oâer the fallen warrior lies,
And everlasting slumber seals his eyes.
Antilochus, as Thoon turnâd him round,
Transpierced his back with a dishonest wound:
The hollow vein, that to the neck extends
Along the chine, his eager javelin rends:
Supine he falls, and to his social train
Spreads his imploring arms, but spreads in vain.
Thv exulting victor, leaping where he lay,
From his broad shoulders tore the spoils away;
His time observed; for closed by foes around,
On all sides thick the peals of arms resound.
His shield embossâd the ringing storm sustains,
But he impervious and untouchâd remains.
(Great Neptuneâs care preserved from hostile rage
This youth, the joy of Nestorâs glorious age.)
In arms intrepid, with the first he fought,
Faced every foe, and every danger sought;
His winged lance, resistless as the wind,
Obeys each motion of the masterâs mind!
Restless it flies, impatient to be free,
And meditates the distant enemy.
The son of Asius, Adamas, drew near,
And struck his target with the brazen spear
Fierce in his front: but Neptune wards the blow,
And blunts the javelin of thâ eluded foe:
In the broad buckler half the weapon stood,
Splinterâd on earth flew half the broken wood.
Disarmâd, he mingled in the Trojan crew;
But Merionâs spear oâertook him as he flew,
Deep in the bellyâs rim an entrance found,
Where sharp the pang, and mortal is the wound.
Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground,
Lay panting. Thus an ox in fetters tied,
While deathâs strong pangs distend his labouring side,
His bulk enormous on the field displays;
His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life decays.
The spear the conqueror from his body drew,
And deathâs dim shadows swarm before his view.
Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid:
King Helenus waved high the Thracian blade,
And smote his temples with an arm so strong,
The helm fell off, and rollâd amid the throng:
There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize;
For dark in death the godlike owner lies!
Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns,
And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns:
That shook the ponderous lance, in act to throw;
And this stood adverse with the bended bow:
Full on his breast the Trojan arrow fell,
But harmless bounded from the plated steel.
As on some ample barnâs well hardenâd floor,
(The winds collected at each open door,)
While the broad fan with force is whirlâd around,
Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground:
So from the steel that guards Atridesâ heart,
Repellâd to distance flies the bounding dart.
Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe,
Pierced with his lance the hand that graspâd the bow.
And nailed it to the yew: the wounded hand
Trailâd the long lance that markâd with blood the sand:
But good Agenor gently from the wound
The spear solicits, and the bandage bound;
A slingâs soft wool, snatchâd from a soldierâs side,
At once the tent and ligature supplied.

Behold! Pisander, urged by fateâs decree,
Springs through the ranks to fall, and fall by thee,
Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame:
High-towering in the front, the warrior came.
First the sharp lance was by Atrides thrown;
The lance far distant by the winds was blown.
Nor pierced Pisander through Atridesâ shield:
Pisanderâs spear fell shiverâd on the field.
Not so discouraged, to the future blind,
Vain dreams of conquest swell his haughty mind;
Dauntless he rushes where the Spartan lord
Like lightning brandishâd his far beaming sword.
His left arm high opposed the shining shield:
His right beneath, the coverâd pole-axe held;
(An oliveâs cloudy grain the handle made,
Distinct with studs, and brazen was the blade;)
This on the helm discharged a noble blow;
The plume droppâd nodding to the plain below,
Shorn from the crest. Atrides waved his steel:
Deep through his front the weighty falchion fell;
The crashing bones before its force gave way;
In dust and blood the groaning hero lay:
Forced from their ghastly orbs, and spouting gore,
The clotted eye-balls tumble on the shore.
And fierce Atrides spurnâd him as he bled,
Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said:

âThus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear;
O race perfidious, who delight in war!
Already noble deeds ye have performâd;
A princess raped transcends a navy stormâd:
In such bold feats your impious might approve,
Without thâ assistance, or the fear of Jove.
The violated rites, the ravishâd dame;
Our heroes slaughterâd and our ships on flame,
Crimes heapâd on crimes, shall bend your glory down,
And whelm in ruins yon flagitious town.
O thou, great father! lord of earth and skies,
Above the thought of man, supremely wise!
If from thy hand the fates of mortals flow,
From whence this favour to an impious foe?
A godless crew, abandonâd and unjust,
Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?
The best of things, beyond their measure, cloy;
Sleepâs balmy blessing, loveâs endearing joy;
The feast, the dance; whateâer mankind desire,
Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire.
But Troy for ever reaps a dire delight
In thirst of slaughter, and in lust of fight.â

This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved)
The bloody armour, which his train received:
Then sudden mixâd among the warring crew,
And the bold son of PylÃ¦menes slew.
Harpalion had through Asia travellâd far,
Following his martial father to the war:
Through filial love he left his native shore,
Never, ah, never to behold it more!
His unsuccessful spear he chanced to fling
Against the target of the Spartan king;
Thus of his lance disarmâd, from death he flies,
And turns around his apprehensive eyes.
Him, through the hip transpiercing as he fled,
The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.
Beneath the bone the glancing point descends,
And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends:
Sunk in his sad companionsâ arms he lay,
And in short pantings sobbâd his soul away;
(Like some vile worm extended on the ground;)
While lifeâs red torrent gushâd from out the wound.

Him on his car the Paphlagonian train
In slow procession bore from off the plain.
The pensive father, father now no more!
Attends the mournful pomp along the shore;
And unavailing tears profusely shed;
And, unrevenged, deplored his offspring dead.

Paris from far the moving sight beheld,
With pity softenâd and with fury swellâd:
His honourâd host, a youth of matchless grace,
And loved of all the Paphlagonian race!
With his full strength he bent his angry bow,
And wingâd the featherâd vengeance at the foe.
A chief there was, the brave Euchenor named,
For riches much, and more for virtue famed.
Who held his seat in Corinthâs stately town;
Polydusâ son, a seer of old renown.
Oft had the father told his early doom,
By arms abroad, or slow disease at home:
He climbâd his vessel, prodigal of breath,
And chose the certain glorious path to death.
Beneath his ear the pointed arrow went;
The soul came issuing at the narrow vent:
His limbs, unnerved, drop useless on the ground,
And everlasting darkness shades him round.

Nor knew great Hector how his legions yield,
(Wrappâd in the cloud and tumult of the field:)
Wide on the left the force of Greece commands,
And conquest hovers oâer thâ Achaian bands;
With such a tide superior virtue swayâd,
And he that shakes the solid earth gave aid.
But in the centre Hector fixâd remainâd,
Where first the gates were forced, and bulwarks gainâd;
There, on the margin of the hoary deep,
(Their naval station where the Ajaces keep.
And where low walls confine the beating tides,
Whose humble barrier scarce the foe divides;
Where late in fight both foot and horse engaged,
And all the thunder of the battle raged,)
There joinâd, the whole BÅotian strength remains,
The proud Iaonians with their sweeping trains,
Locrians and Phthians, and thâ Epaean force;
But joinâd, repel not Hectorâs fiery course.
The flower of Athens, Stichius, Phidas, led;
Bias and great Menestheus at their head:
Meges the strong the Epaean bands controllâd,
And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold:
The Phthians, Medon, famed for martial might,
And brave Podarces, active in the fight.
This drew from Phylacus his noble line;
Iphiclusâ son: and that (Oileus) thine:
(Young Ajaxâ brother, by a stolen embrace;
He dwelt far distant from his native place,
By his fierce step-dame from his fatherâs reign
Expellâd and exiled for her brother slain:)
These rule the Phthians, and their arms employ,
Mixâd with BÅotians, on the shores of Troy.

Now side by side, with like unwearied care,
Each Ajax laboured through the field of war:
So when two lordly bulls, with equal toil,
Force the bright ploughshare through the fallow soil,
Joinâd to one yoke, the stubborn earth they tear,
And trace large furrows with the shining share;
Oâer their huge limbs the foam descends in snow,
And streams of sweat down their sour foreheads flow.
A train of heroes followed through the field,
Who bore by turns great Ajaxâ sevenfold shield;
Wheneâer he breathed, remissive of his might,
Tired with the incessant slaughters of the fight.
No following troops his brave associate grace:
In close engagement an unpractised race,
The Locrian squadrons nor the javelin wield,
Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield;
But skillâd from far the flying shaft to wing,
Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling,
Dexterous with these they aim a certain wound,
Or fell the distant warrior to the ground.
Thus in the van the Telamonian train,
Throngâd in bright arms, a pressing fight maintain:
Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie,
Whose stones and arrows intercept the sky,
The mingled tempest on the foes they pour;
Troyâs scattering orders open to the shower.

Now had the Greeks eternal fame acquired,
And the gallâd Ilians to their walls retired;
But sage Polydamas, discreetly brave,
Addressâd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

âThough great in all, thou seemâst averse to lend
Impartial audience to a faithful friend;
To gods and men thy matchless worth is known,
And every art of glorious war thy own;
But in cool thought and counsel to excel,
How widely differs this from warring well!
Content with what the bounteous gods have given,
Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven.
To some the powers of bloody war belong,
To some sweet music and the charm of song;
To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assignâd
A wise, extensive, all-considering mind;
Their guardians these, the nations round confess,
And towns and empires for their safety bless.
If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast,
Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best,
See, as thou movâst, on dangers dangers spread,
And warâs whole fury burns around thy head.
Behold! distressâd within yon hostile wall,
How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
What troops, out-numberâd, scarce the war maintain!
And what brave heroes at the ships lie slain!
Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kings
Convoked to council, weigh the sum of things.
Whether (the gods succeeding our desires)
To yon tall ships to bear the Trojan fires;
Or quit the fleet, and pass unhurt away,
Contented with the conquest of the day.
I fear, I fear, lest Greece, not yet undone,
Pay the large debt of last revolving sun;
Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains
On yonder decks, and yet oâerlooks the plains!â

The counsel pleased; and Hector, with a bound,
Leapâd from his chariot on the trembling ground;
Swift as he leapâd his clanging arms resound.
âTo guard this post (he cried) thy art employ,
And here detain the scatterâd youth of Troy;
Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way,
And hasten back to end the doubtful day.â

This said, the towering chief prepares to go,
Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow,
And seems a moving mountain toppâd with snow.
Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies,
And bids anew the martial thunder rise.
To Panthusâ son, at Hectorâs high command
Haste the bold leaders of the Trojan band:
But round the battlements, and round the plain,
For many a chief he lookâd, but lookâd in vain;
Deiphobus, nor Helenus the seer,
Nor Asiusâ son, nor Asiusâ self appear:
For these were pierced with many a ghastly wound,
Some cold in death, some groaning on the ground;
Some low in dust, (a mournful object) lay;
High on the wall some breathed their souls away.

Far on the left, amid the throng he found
(Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths around)
The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved,
Opprobrious thus, thâ impatient chief reproved:

âIll-fated Paris! slave to womankind,
As smooth of face as fraudulent of mind!
Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?
The godlike father, and thâ intrepid son?
The force of Helenus, dispensing fate;
And great Othryoneus, so fearâd of late?
Black fate hangâs oâer thee from thâ avenging gods,
Imperial Troy from her foundations nods;
Whelmâd in thy countryâs ruin shalt thou fall,
And one devouring vengeance swallow all.â

When Paris thus: âMy brother and my friend,
Thy warm impatience makes thy tongue offend,
In other battles I deserved thy blame,
Though then not deedless, nor unknown to fame:
But since yon rampart by thy arms lay low,
I scatterâd slaughter from my fatal bow.
The chiefs you seek on yonder shore lie slain;
Of all those heroes, two alone remain;
Deiphobus, and Helenus the seer,
Each now disabled by a hostile spear.
Go then, successful, where thy soul inspires:
This heart and hand shall second all thy fires:
What with this arm I can, prepare to know,
Till death for death be paid, and blow for blow.
But âtis not ours, with forces not our own
To combat: strength is of the gods alone.â
These words the heroâs angry mind assuage:
Then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage.
Around Polydamas, distainâd with blood,
Cebrion, Phalces, stern Orthaeus stood,
Palmus, with Polypoetes the divine,
And two bold brothers of Hippotionâs line
(Who reachâd fair Ilion, from Ascania far,
The former day; the next engaged in war).
As when from gloomy clouds a whirlwind springs,
That bears Joveâs thunder on its dreadful wings,
Wide oâer the blasted fields the tempest sweeps;
Then, gatherâd, settles on the hoary deeps;
The afflicted deeps tumultuous mix and roar;
The waves behind impel the waves before,
Wide rolling, foaming high, and tumbling to the shore:
Thus rank on rank, the thick battalions throng,
Chief urged on chief, and man drove man along.
Far oâer the plains, in dreadful order bright,
The brazen arms reflect a beamy light:
Full in the blazing van great Hector shined,
Like Mars commissionâd to confound mankind.
Before him flaming his enormous shield,
Like the broad sun, illumined all the field;
His nodding helm emits a streamy ray;
His piercing eyes through all the battle stray,
And, while beneath his targe he flashâd along,
Shot terrors round, that witherâd eâen the strong.

Thus stalkâd he, dreadful; death was in his look:
Whole nations fearâd; but not an Argive shook.
The towering Ajax, with an ample stride,
Advanced the first, and thus the chief defied:

âHector! come on; thy empty threats forbear;
âTis not thy arm, âtis thundering Jove we fear:
The skill of war to us not idly given,
Lo! Greece is humbled, not by Troy, but Heaven.
Vain are the hopes that haughty mind imparts,
To force our fleet: the Greeks have hands and hearts.
Long ere in flames our lofty navy fall,
Your boasted city, and your god-built wall,
Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the ground;
And spread a long unmeasured ruin round.
The time shall come, when, chased along the plain,
Even thou shalt call on Jove, and call in vain;
Even thou shalt wish, to aid thy desperate course,
The wings of falcons for thy flying horse;
Shalt run, forgetful of a warriorâs fame,
While clouds of friendly dust conceal thy shame.â

As thus he spoke, behold, in open view,
On sounding wings a dexter eagle flew.
To Joveâs glad omen all the Grecians rise,
And hail, with shouts, his progress through the skies:
Far-echoing clamours bound from side to side;
They ceased; and thus the chief of Troy replied:

âFrom whence this menace, this insulting strain?
Enormous boaster! doomâd to vaunt in vain.
So may the gods on Hector life bestow,
(Not that short life which mortals lead below,
But such as those of Joveâs high lineage born,
The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,)
As this decisive day shall end the fame
Of Greece, and Argos be no more a name.
And thou, imperious! if thy madness wait
The lance of Hector, thou shalt meet thy fate:
That giant-corse, extended on the shore,
Shall largely feast the fowls with fat and gore.â

He said; and like a lion stalkâd along:
With shouts incessant earth and ocean rung,
Sent from his following host: the Grecian train
With answering thunders fillâd the echoing plain;
A shout that tore heavenâs concave, and, above,
Shook the fixâd splendours of the throne of Jove.


[Illustration: ] GREEK EARRINGS




BOOK XIV.


ARGUMENT.[231]


JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENUS.


Nestor, sitting at the table with Machaon, is alarmed with the
increasing clamour of war, and hastens to Agamemnon; on his way he
meets that prince with Diomed and Ulysses, whom he informs of the
extremity of the danger. Agamemnon proposes to make their escape by
night, which Ulysses withstands; to which Diomed adds his advice, that,
wounded as they were, they should go forth and encourage the army with
their presence, which advice is pursued. Juno, seeing the partiality of
Jupiter to the Trojans, forms a design to over-reach him: she sets off
her charms with the utmost care, and (the more surely to enchant him)
obtains the magic girdle of Venus. She then applies herself to the god
of sleep, and, with some difficulty, persuades him to seal the eyes of
Jupiter: this done, she goes to mount Ida, where the god, at first
sight, is ravished with her beauty, sinks in her embraces, and is laid
asleep. Neptune takes advantage of his slumber, and succours the
Greeks: Hector is struck to the ground with a prodigious stone by Ajax,
and carried off from the battle: several actions succeed, till the
Trojans, much distressed, are obliged to give way: the lesser Ajax
signalizes himself in a particular manner.


But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl,
Could charm the cares of Nestorâs watchful soul;
His startled ears the increasing cries attend;
Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend:

âWhat new alarm, divine Machaon, say,
What mixâd events attend this mighty day?
Hark! how the shouts divide, and how they meet,
And now come full, and thicken to the fleet!
Here with the cordial draught dispel thy care,
Let Hecamede the strengthening bath prepare,
Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore;
While I the adventures of the day explore.â

He said: and, seizing Thrasymedesâ shield,
(His valiant offspring,) hastenâd to the field;
(That day the son his fatherâs buckler bore;)
Then snatchâd a lance, and issued from the door.
Soon as the prospect openâd to his view,
His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew;
Dire disarray! the tumult of the fight,
The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight.
As when old oceanâs silent surface sleeps,
The waves just heaving on the purple deeps:
While yet the expected tempest hangs on high,
Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in the sky,
The mass of waters will no wind obey;
Jove sends one gust, and bids them roll away.
While wavering counsels thus his mind engage,
Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage,
To join the host, or to the general haste;
Debating long, he fixes on the last:
Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms,
The field rings dreadful with the clang of arms,
The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins fly;
Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die.

Him, in his march, the wounded princes meet,
By tardy steps ascending from the fleet:
The king of men, Ulysses the divine,
And who to Tydeus owes his noble line[232]
(Their ships at distance from the battle stand,
In lines advanced along the shelving strand:
Whose bay, the fleet unable to contain
At length; beside the margin of the main,
Rank above rank, the crowded ships they moor:
Who landed first, lay highest on the shore.)
Supported on the spears, they took their way,
Unfit to fight, but anxious for the day.
Nestorâs approach alarmâd each Grecian breast,
Whom thus the general of the host addressâd:

âO grace and glory of the Achaian name;
What drives thee, Nestor, from the field of fame?
Shall then proud Hector see his boast fulfillâd,
Our fleets in ashes, and our heroes killâd?
Such was his threat, ah! now too soon made good,
On many a Grecian bosom writ in blood.
Is every heart inflamed with equal rage
Against your king, nor will one chief engage?
And have I lived to see with mournful eyes
In every Greek a new Achilles rise?â

Gerenian Nestor then: âSo fate has willâd;
And all-confirming time has fate fulfillâd.
Not he that thunders from the aerial bower,
Not Jove himself, upon the past has power.
The wall, our late inviolable bound,
And best defence, lies smoking on the ground:
Even to the ships their conquering arms extend,
And groans of slaughterâd Greeks to heaven ascend.
On speedy measures then employ your thought
In such distress! if counsel profit aught:
Arms cannot much: though Mars our souls incite,
These gaping wounds withhold us from the fight.â

To him the monarch: âThat our army bends,
That Troy triumphant our high fleet ascends,
And that the rampart, late our surest trust
And best defence, lies smoking in the dust;
All this from Joveâs afflictive hand we bear,
Who, far from Argos, wills our ruin here.
Past are the days when happier Greece was blest,
And all his favour, all his aid confessâd;
Now heaven averse, our hands from battle ties,
And lifts the Trojan glory to the skies.
Cease we at length to waste our blood in vain,
And launch what ships lie nearest to the main;
Leave these at anchor, till the coming night:
Then, if impetuous Troy forbear the fight,
Bring all to sea, and hoist each sail for flight.
Better from evils, well foreseen, to run,
Than perish in the danger we may shun.â

Thus he. The sage Ulysses thus replies,
While anger flashâd from his disdainful eyes:
âWhat shameful words (unkingly as thou art)
Fall from that trembling tongue and timorous heart?
Oh were thy sway the curse of meaner powers,
And thou the shame of any host but ours!
A host, by Jove endued with martial might,
And taught to conquer, or to fall in fight:
Adventurous combats and bold wars to wage,
Employâd our youth, and yet employs our age.
And wilt thou thus desert the Trojan plain?
And have whole streams of blood been spilt in vain?
In such base sentence if thou couch thy fear,
Speak it in whispers, lest a Greek should hear.
Lives there a man so dead to fame, who dares
To think such meanness, or the thought declares?
And comes it even from him whose sovereign sway
The banded legions of all Greece obey?
Is this a generalâs voice that calls to flight,
While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight?
What more could Troy? What yet their fate denies
Thou givest the foe: all Greece becomes their prize.
No more the troops (our hoisted sails in view,
Themselves abandonâd) shall the fight pursue;
But thy ships flying, with despair shall see;
And owe destruction to a prince like thee.â

âThy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies)
Like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise.
Unwilling as I am to lose the host,
I force not Greece to quit this hateful coast;
Glad I submit, whoeâer, or young, or old,
Aught, more conducive to our weal, unfold.â

Tydides cut him short, and thus began:
âSuch counsel if you seek, behold the man
Who boldly gives it, and what he shall say,
Young though he be, disdain not to obey:
A youth, who from the mighty Tydeus springs,
May speak to councils and assembled kings.
Hear then in me the great OEnidesâ son,
Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run)
Lies whelmâd in ruins of the Theban wall;
Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall.
With three bold sons was generous Prothous blessâd,
Who Pleuronâs walls and Calydon possessâd;
Melas and Agrius, but (who far surpassâd
The rest in courage) OEneus was the last.
From him, my sire. From Calydon expellâd,
He passâd to Argos, and in exile dwellâd;
The monarchâs daughter there (so Jove ordainâd)
He won, and flourishâd where Adrastus reignâd;
There, rich in fortuneâs gifts, his acres tillâd,
Beheld his vines their liquid harvest yield,
And numerous flocks that whitenâd all the field.
Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in fame!
Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name.
Then, what for common good my thoughts inspire,
Attend, and in the son respect the sire.
Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppressâd,
Let each go forth, and animate the rest,
Advance the glory which he cannot share,
Though not partaker, witness of the war.
But lest new wounds on wounds oâerpower us quite,
Beyond the missile javelinâs sounding flight,
Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult far,
Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war.â

He added not: the listening kings obey,
Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.
The god of ocean (to inflame their rage)
Appears a warrior furrowed oâer with age;
Pressâd in his own, the generalâs hand he took,
And thus the venerable hero spoke:

âAtrides! lo! with what disdainful eye
Achilles sees his countryâs forces fly;
Blind, impious man! whose anger is his guide,
Who glories in unutterable pride.
So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim
The wretch relentless, and oâerwhelm with shame!
But Heaven forsakes not thee: oâer yonder sands
Soon shall thou view the scattered Trojan bands
Fly diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renownâd,
Driven heaps on heaps, with clouds involved around
Of rolling dust, their winged wheels employ
To hide their ignominious heads in Troy.â

He spoke, then rushâd amid the warrior crew,
And sent his voice before him as he flew,
Loud, as the shout encountering armies yield
When twice ten thousand shake the labouring field;
Such was the voice, and such the thundering sound
Of him whose trident rends the solid ground.
Each Argive bosom beats to meet the fight,
And grisly war appears a pleasing sight.

Meantime Saturnia from Olympusâ brow,
High-throned in gold, beheld the fields below;
With joy the glorious conflict she surveyâd,
Where her great brother gave the Grecians aid.
But placed aloft, on Idaâs shady height
She sees her Jove, and trembles at the sight.
Jove to deceive, what methods shall she try,
What arts, to blind his all-beholding eye?
At length she trusts her power; resolved to prove
The old, yet still successful, cheat of love;
Against his wisdom to oppose her charms,
And lull the lord of thunders in her arms.

Swift to her bright apartment she repairs,
Sacred to dress and beautyâs pleasing cares:
With skill divine had Vulcan formâd the bower,
Safe from access of each intruding power.
Touchâd with her secret key, the doors unfold:
Self-closed, behind her shut the valves of gold.
Here first she bathes; and round her body pours
Soft oils of fragrance, and ambrosial showers:
The winds, perfumed, the balmy gale convey
Through heaven, through earth, and all the aerial way:
Spirit divine! whose exhalation greets
The sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.
Thus while she breathed of heaven, with decent pride
Her artful hands the radiant tresses tied;
Part on her head in shining ringlets rollâd,
Part oâer her shoulders waved like melted gold.
Around her next a heavenly mantle flowâd,
That rich with Pallasâ labourâd colours glowâd:
Large clasps of gold the foldings gatherâd round,
A golden zone her swelling bosom bound.
Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear,
Each gem illumined with a triple star.
Then oâer her head she cast a veil more white
Than new-fallen snow, and dazzling as the light.
Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.
Thus issuing radiant with majestic pace,
Forth from the dome the imperial goddess moves,
And calls the mother of the smiles and loves.

âHow long (to Venus thus apart she cried)
Shall human strife celestial minds divide?
Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturniaâs joy,
And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?â

âLet heavenâs dread empress (Cytheraea said)
Speak her request, and deem her will obeyâd.â

âThen grant me (said the queen) those conquering charms,
That power, which mortals and immortals warms,
That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires,
And burns the sons of heaven with sacred fires!

âFor lo! I haste to those remote abodes,
Where the great parents, (sacred source of gods!)
Ocean and Tethys their old empire keep,
On the last limits of the land and deep.
In their kind arms my tender years were past;
What time old Saturn, from Olympus cast,
Of upper heaven to Jove resignâd the reign,
Whelmâd under the huge mass of earth and main.
For strife, I hear, has made the union cease,
Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
What honour, and what love, shall I obtain,
If I compose those fatal feuds again;
Once more their minds in mutual ties engage,
And, what my youth has owed, repay their age!â

She said. With awe divine, the queen of love
Obeyâd the sister and the wife of Jove;
And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,[233]
With various skill and high embroidery graced.
In this was every art, and every charm,
To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:
Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire,
The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire,
Persuasive speech, and the more persuasive sighs,
Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes.
This on her hand the Cyprian Goddess laid:
âTake this, and with it all thy wish;â she said.
With smiles she took the charm; and smiling pressâd
The powerful cestus to her snowy breast.

Then Venus to the courts of Jove withdrew;
Whilst from Olympus pleased Saturnia flew.
Oâer high Pieria thence her course she bore,
Oâer fair Emathiaâs ever-pleasing shore,
Oâer Hemusâ hills with snows eternal crownâd;
Nor once her flying foot approachâd the ground.
Then taking wing from Athosâ lofty steep,
She speeds to Lemnos oâer the rolling deep,
And seeks the cave of Deathâs half-brother, Sleep.[234]

âSweet pleasing Sleep! (Saturnia thus began)
Who spreadâst thy empire oâer each god and man;
If eâer obsequious to thy Junoâs will,
O power of slumbers! hear, and favour still.
Shed thy soft dews on Joveâs immortal eyes,
While sunk in loveâs entrancing joys he lies.
A splendid footstool, and a throne, that shine
With gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine;
The work of Vulcan; to indulge thy ease,
When wine and feasts thy golden humours please.â

âImperial dame (the balmy power replies),
Great Saturnâs heir, and empress of the skies!
Oâer other gods I spread my easy chain;
The sire of all, old Ocean, owns my reign.
And his hushâd waves lie silent on the main.
But how, unbidden, shall I dare to steep
Joveâs awful temples in the dew of sleep?
Long since, too venturous, at thy bold command,
On those eternal lids I laid my hand;
What time, deserting Ilionâs wasted plain,
His conquering son, Alcides, ploughâd the main.
When lo! the deeps arise, the tempests roar,
And drive the hero to the Coan shore:
Great Jove, awaking, shook the blest abodes
With rising wrath, and tumbled gods on gods;
Me chief he sought, and from the realms on high
Had hurlâd indignant to the nether sky,
But gentle Night, to whom I fled for aid,
(The friend of earth and heaven,) her wings displayâd;
Impowerâd the wrath of gods and men to tame,
Even Jove revered the venerable dame.â

âVain are thy fears (the queen of heaven replies,
And, speaking, rolls her large majestic eyes);
Thinkâst thou that Troy has Joveâs high favour won,
Like great Alcides, his all-conquering son?
Hear, and obey the mistress of the skies,
Nor for the deed expect a vulgar prize;
For know, thy loved-one shall be ever thine,
The youngest Grace, PasithaÃ« the divine.â[235]

âSwear then (he said) by those tremendous floods
That roar through hell, and bind the invoking gods:
Let the great parent earth one hand sustain,
And stretch the other oâer the sacred main:
Call the black Titans, that with Chronos dwell,
To hear and witness from the depths of hell;
That she, my loved-one, shall be ever mine,
The youngest Grace, PasithaÃ« the divine.â

The queen assents, and from the infernal bowers
Invokes the sable subtartarean powers,
And those who rule the inviolable floods,
Whom mortals name the dread Titanian gods.


[Illustration: ] SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER


Then swift as wind, oâer Lemnosâ smoky isle
They wing their way, and Imbrusâ sea-beat soil;
Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide,
And light on Lectos, on the point of Ide:
(Mother of savages, whose echoing hills
Are heard resounding with a hundred rills:)
Fair Ida trembles underneath the god;
Hushâd are her mountains, and her forests nod.
There on a fir, whose spiry branches rise
To join its summit to the neighbouring skies;
Dark in embowering shade, concealâd from sight,
Sat Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night.
(Chalcis his name by those of heavenly birth,
But callâd Cymindis by the race of earth.)

To Idaâs top successful Juno flies;
Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes:
The god, whose lightning sets the heavens on fire,
Through all his bosom feels the fierce desire;
Fierce as when first by stealth he seized her charms,
Mixâd with her soul, and melted in her arms:
Fixâd on her eyes he fed his eager look,
Then pressâd her hand, and thus with transport spoke:

âWhy comes my goddess from the ethereal sky,
And not her steeds and flaming chariot nigh?â

Then sheââI haste to those remote abodes
Where the great parents of the deathless gods,
The reverend Ocean and gray Tethys, reign,
On the last limits of the land and main.
I visit these, to whose indulgent cares
I owe the nursing of my tender years:
For strife, I hear, has made that union cease
Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
The steeds, prepared my chariot to convey
Oâer earth and seas, and through the aerial way,
Wait under Ide: of thy superior power
To ask consent, I leave the Olympian bower;
Nor seek, unknown to thee, the sacred cells
Deep under seas, where hoary Ocean dwells.â

âFor that (said Jove) suffice another day!
But eager love denies the least delay.
Let softer cares the present hour employ,
And be these moments sacred all to joy.
Neâer did my soul so strong a passion prove,
Or for an earthly, or a heavenly love:
Not when I pressâd Ixionâs matchless dame,
Whence rose Pirithous like the gods in fame:
Not when fair Danae felt the shower of gold
Stream into life, whence Perseus brave and bold.
Not thus I burnâd for either Theban dame:
(Bacchus from this, from that Alcides came:)
Nor PhÅnixâ daughter, beautiful and young,
Whence godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.[236]
Not thus I burnâd for fair Latonaâs face,
Nor comelier Ceresâ more majestic grace.
Not thus even for thyself I felt desire,
As now my veins receive the pleasing fire.â

He spoke; the goddess with the charming eyes
Glows with celestial red, and thus replies:
âIs this a scene for love? On Idaâs height,
Exposed to mortal and immortal sight!
Our joys profaned by each familiar eye;
The sport of heaven, and fable of the sky:
How shall I eâer review the blest abodes,
Or mix among the senate of the gods?
Shall I not think, that, with disorderâd charms,
All heaven beholds me recent from thy arms?
With skill divine has Vulcan formâd thy bower,
Sacred to love and to the genial hour;
If such thy will, to that recess retire,
In secret there indulge thy soft desire.â

She ceased; and, smiling with superior love,
Thus answerâd mild the cloud-compelling Jove:
âNor god nor mortal shall our joys behold,
Shaded with clouds, and circumfused in gold;
Not even the sun, who darts through heaven his rays,
And whose broad eye the extended earth surveys.â

Gazing he spoke, and, kindling at the view,
His eager arms around the goddess threw.
Glad Earth perceives, and from her bosom pours
Unbidden herbs and voluntary flowers:
Thick new-born violets a soft carpet spread,
And clustering lotos swellâd the rising bed,
And sudden hyacinths the turf bestrow,[237]
And flamy crocus made the mountain glow
There golden clouds conceal the heavenly pair,
Steepâd in soft joys and circumfused with air;
Celestial dews, descending oâer the ground,
Perfume the mount, and breathe ambrosia round:
At length, with love and sleepâs soft power oppressâd,
The panting thunderer nods, and sinks to rest.

Now to the navy borne on silent wings,
To Neptuneâs ear soft Sleep his message brings;
Beside him sudden, unperceived, he stood,
And thus with gentle words addressâd the god:

âNow, Neptune! now, the important hour employ,
To check a while the haughty hopes of Troy:
While Jove yet rests, while yet my vapours shed
The golden vision round his sacred head;
For Junoâs love, and Somnusâ pleasing ties,
Have closed those awful and eternal eyes.â
Thus having said, the power of slumber flew,
On human lids to drop the balmy dew.
Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care,
And towering in the foremost ranks of war,
Indignant thusââOh once of martial fame!
O Greeks! if yet ye can deserve the name!
This half-recoverâd day shall Troy obtain?
Shall Hector thunder at your ships again?
Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet with fires,
While stern Achilles in his wrath retires.
One heroâs loss too tamely you deplore,
Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more.
Oh yet, if glory any bosom warms,
Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms:
His strongest spear each valiant Grecian wield,
Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield;
Let to the weak the lighter arms belong,
The ponderous targe be wielded by the strong.
Thus armâd, not Hector shall our presence stay;
Myself, ye Greeks! myself will lead the way.â


[Illustration: ] GREEK SHIELD


The troops assent; their martial arms they change:
The busy chiefs their banded legions range.
The kings, though wounded, and oppressâd with pain,
With helpful hands themselves assist the train.
The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield,
The weaker warrior takes a lighter shield.
Thus sheathâd in shining brass, in bright array
The legions march, and Neptune leads the way:
His brandishâd falchion flames before their eyes,
Like lightning flashing through the frighted skies.
Clad in his might, the earth-shaking power appears;
Pale mortals tremble, and confess their fears.

Troyâs great defender stands alone unawed,
Arms his proud host, and dares oppose a god:
And lo! the god, and wondrous man, appear:
The seaâs stern ruler there, and Hector here.
The roaring main, at her great masterâs call,
Rose in huge ranks, and formâd a watery wall
Around the ships: seas hanging oâer the shores,
Both armies join: earth thunders, ocean roars.
Not half so loud the bellowing deeps resound,
When stormy winds disclose the dark profound;
Less loud the winds that from the Ãolian hall
Roar through the woods, and make whole forests fall;
Less loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour,
Catch the dry mountain, and its shades devour;
With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven,
And such a clamour shakes the sounding heaven.
The first bold javelin, urged by Hectorâs force,
Direct at Ajaxâ bosom winged its course;
But there no pass the crossing belts afford,
(One braced his shield, and one sustainâd his sword.)
Then back the disappointed Trojan drew,
And cursed the lance that unavailing flew:
But âscaped not Ajax; his tempestuous hand
A ponderous stone upheaving from the sand,
(Where heaps laid loose beneath the warriorâs feet,
Or served to ballast, or to prop the fleet,)
Tossâd round and round, the missive marble flings;
On the razed shield the fallen ruin rings,
Full on his breast and throat with force descends;
Nor deadenâd there its giddy fury spends,
But whirling on, with many a fiery round,
Smokes in the dust, and ploughs into the ground.
As when the bolt, red-hissing from above,
Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove,
The mountain-oak in flaming ruin lies,
Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise;
Stiff with amaze the pale beholders stand,
And own the terrors of the almighty hand!
So lies great Hector prostrate on the shore;
His slackenâd hand deserts the lance it bore;
His following shield the fallen chief oâerspread;
Beneath his helmet droppâd his fainting head;
His load of armour, sinking to the ground,
Clanks on the field, a dead and hollow sound.
Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain;
Greece sees, in hope, Troyâs great defender slain:
All spring to seize him; storms of arrows fly,
And thicker javelins intercept the sky.
In vain an iron tempest hisses round;
He lies protected, and without a wound.[238]
Polydamas, Agenor the divine,
The pious warrior of Anchisesâ line,
And each bold leader of the Lycian band,
With covering shields (a friendly circle) stand,
His mournful followers, with assistant care,
The groaning hero to his chariot bear;
His foaming coursers, swifter than the wind,
Speed to the town, and leave the war behind.

When now they touchâd the meadâs enamellâd side,
Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy tide,
With watery drops the chief they sprinkle round,
Placed on the margin of the flowery ground.
Raised on his knees, he now ejects the gore;
Now faints anew, low-sinking on the shore;
By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting skies,
And seals again, by fits, his swimming eyes.

Soon as the Greeks the chiefâs retreat beheld,
With double fury each invades the field.
Oilean Ajax first his javelin sped,
Pierced by whose point the son of Enops bled;
(Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis bore
Amidst her flocks on Satnioâs silver shore;)
Struck through the bellyâs rim, the warrior lies
Supine, and shades eternal veil his eyes.
An arduous battle rose around the dead;
By turns the Greeks, by turns the Trojans bled.

Fired with revenge, Polydamas drew near,
And at Prothoenor shook the trembling spear;
The driving javelin through his shoulder thrust,
He sinks to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
âLo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field,
And thus their arms the race of Panthus wield:
From this unerring hand there flies no dart
But bathes its point within a Grecian heart.
Proppâd on that spear to which thou owest thy fall,
Go, guide thy darksome steps to Plutoâs dreary hall.â

He said, and sorrow touchâd each Argive breast:
The soul of Ajax burnâd above the rest.
As by his side the groaning warrior fell,
At the fierce foe he launchâd his piercing steel;
The foe, reclining, shunnâd the flying death;
But fate, Archilochus, demands thy breath:
Thy lofty birth no succour could impart,
The wings of death oâertook thee on the dart;
Swift to perform heavenâs fatal will, it fled
Full on the juncture of the neck and head,
And took the joint, and cut the nerves in twain:
The dropping head first tumbled on the plain.
So just the stroke, that yet the body stood
Erect, then rollâd along the sands in blood.

âHere, proud Polydamas, here turn thy eyes!
(The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:)
Say, is this chief extended on the plain
A worthy vengeance for Prothoenor slain?
Mark well his port! his figure and his face
Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race;
Some lines, methinks, may make his lineage known,
Antenorâs brother, or perhaps his son.â

He spake, and smiled severe, for well he knew
The bleeding youth: Troy saddenâd at the view.
But furious Acamas avenged his cause;
As Promachus his slaughtered brother draws,
He pierced his heartââSuch fate attends you all,
Proud Argives! destined by our arms to fall.
Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece, shall share
The toils, the sorrows, and the wounds of war.
Behold your Promachus deprived of breath,
A victim owed to my brave brotherâs death.
Not unappeased he enters Plutoâs gate,
Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate.â

Heart-piercing anguish struck the Grecian host,
But touchâd the breast of bold Peneleus most;
At the proud boaster he directs his course;
The boaster flies, and shuns superior force.
But young Ilioneus received the spear;
Ilioneus, his fatherâs only care:
(Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan train
Whom Hermes loved, and taught the arts of gain:)
Full in his eye the weapon chanced to fall,
And from the fibres scoopâd the rooted ball,
Drove through the neck, and hurlâd him to the plain;
He lifts his miserable arms in vain!
Swift his broad falchion fierce Peneleus spread,
And from the spouting shoulders struck his head;
To earth at once the head and helmet fly;
The lance, yet sticking through the bleeding eye,
The victor seized; and, as aloft he shook
The gory visage, thus insulting spoke:

âTrojans! your great Ilioneus behold!
Haste, to his father let the tale be told:
Let his high roofs resound with frantic woe,
Such as the house of Promachus must know;
Let doleful tidings greet his motherâs ear,
Such as to Promachusâ sad spouse we bear,
When we victorious shall to Greece return,
And the pale matron in our triumphs mourn.â

Dreadful he spoke, then tossâd the head on high;
The Trojans hear, they tremble, and they fly:
Aghast they gaze around the fleet and wall,
And dread the ruin that impends on all.

Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine,
Ye all-beholding, all-recording nine!
O say, when Neptune made proud Ilion yield,
What chief, what hero first embrued the field?
Of all the Grecians what immortal name,
And whose blessâd trophies, will ye raise to fame?

Thou first, great Ajax! on the unsanguined plain
Laid Hyrtius, leader of the Mysian train.
Phalces and Mermer, Nestorâs son oâerthrew,
Bold Merion, Morys and Hippotion slew.
Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled,
By Teucerâs arrows mingled with the dead,
Pierced in the flank by Menelausâ steel,
His peopleâs pastor, Hyperenor fell;
Eternal darkness wrappâd the warrior round,
And the fierce soul came rushing through the wound.
But stretchâd in heaps before Oileusâ son,
Fall mighty numbers, mighty numbers run;
Ajax the less, of all the Grecian race
Skillâd in pursuit, and swiftest in the chase.


[Illustration: ] BACCHUS




BOOK XV.


ARGUMENT.


THE FIFTH BATTLE AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX.


Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector
in a swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highly
incensed at the artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions;
she is then sent to Iris and Apollo. Juno, repairing to the assembly of
the gods, attempts, with extraordinary address, to incense them against
Jupiter; in particular she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he
is ready to take arms, but is prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo
obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris commands Neptune to leave the battle,
to which, after much reluctance and passion, he consents. Apollo
reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him back to the battle, marches
before him with his aegis, and turns the fortune of the fight. He
breaks down great part of the Grecian wall: the Trojans rush in, and
attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are, as yet, repelled
by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.


Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound,
And many a chief lay gasping on the ground:
Then stoppâd and panted, where the chariots lie
Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
Meanwhile, awakenâd from his dream of love,
On Idaâs summit sat imperial Jove:
Round the wide fields he cast a careful view,
There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue;
These proud in arms, those scatterâd oâer the plain
And, âmidst the war, the monarch of the main.
Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies,
(His sad associates round with weeping eyes,)
Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath,
His senses wandering to the verge of death.
The god beheld him with a pitying look,
And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke:

âO thou, still adverse to the eternal will,
For ever studious in promoting ill!
Thy arts have made the godlike Hector yield,
And driven his conquering squadrons from the field.
Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstand
Our power immense, and brave the almighty hand?
Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fixâd on high,
From the vast concave of the spangled sky,
I hung thee trembling in a golden chain,
And all the raging gods opposed in vain?
Headlong I hurlâd them from the Olympian hall,
Stunnâd in the whirl, and breathless with the fall.
For godlike Hercules these deeds were done,
Nor seemâd the vengeance worthy such a son:
When, by thy wiles induced, fierce Boreas tossâd
The shipwreckâd hero on the Coan coast,
Him through a thousand forms of death I bore,
And sent to Argos, and his native shore.
Hear this, remember, and our fury dread,
Nor pull the unwilling vengeance on thy head;
Lest arts and blandishments successless prove,
Thy soft deceits, and well-dissembled love.â

The Thunderer spoke: imperial Juno mournâd,
And, trembling, these submissive words returnâd:

âBy every oath that powers immortal ties,
The foodful earth and all-infolding skies;
By thy black waves, tremendous Styx! that flow
Through the drear realms of gliding ghosts below;
By the dread honours of thy sacred head,
And that unbroken vow, our virgin bed!
Not by my arts the ruler of the main
Steeps Troy in blood, and ranges round the plain:
By his own ardour, his own pity swayâd,
To help his Greeks, he fought and disobeyâd:
Else had thy Juno better counsels given,
And taught submission to the sire of heaven.â

âThinkâst thou with me? fair empress of the skies!
(The immortal father with a smile replies;)
Then soon the haughty sea-god shall obey,
Nor dare to act but when we point the way.
If truth inspires thy tongue, proclaim our will
To yon bright synod on the Olympian hill;
Our high decree let various Iris know,
And call the god that bears the silver bow.
Let her descend, and from the embattled plain
Command the sea-god to his watery reign:
While PhÅbus hastes great Hector to prepare
To rise afresh, and once more wake the war:
His labouring bosom re-inspires with breath,
And calls his senses from the verge of death.
Greece chased by Troy, even to Achillesâ fleet,
Shall fall by thousands at the heroâs feet.
He, not untouchâd with pity, to the plain
Shall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain.
What youths he slaughters under Ilionâs walls!
Even my loved son, divine Sarpedon, falls!
Vanquishâd at last by Hectorâs lance he lies.
Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise:
And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies.
From that great hour the warâs whole fortune turns,
Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns.
Not till that day shall Jove relax his rage,
Nor one of all the heavenly host engage
In aid of Greece. The promise of a god
I gave, and sealâd it with the almighty nod,
Achillesâ glory to the stars to raise;
Such was our word, and fate the word obeys.â

The trembling queen (the almighty order given)
Swift from the Idaean summit shot to heaven.
As some wayfaring man, who wanders oâer
In thought a length of lands he trod before,
Sends forth his active mind from place to place,
Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space:
So swift flew Juno to the blessâd abodes,
If thought of man can match the speed of gods.
There sat the powers in awful synod placed;
They bowâd, and made obeisance as she passâd
Through all the brazen dome:[239] with goblets crownâd
They hail her queen; the nectar streams around.
Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl,
And anxious asks what cares disturb her soul?

To whom the white-armâd goddess thus replies:
âEnough thou knowâst the tyrant of the skies,
Severely bent his purpose to fulfil,
Unmoved his mind, and unrestrainâd his will.
Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy call;
Bid the crownâd nectar circle round the hall:
But Jove shall thunder through the ethereal dome
Such stern decrees, such threatenâd woes to come,
As soon shall freeze mankind with dire surprise,
And damp the eternal banquets of the skies.â

The goddess said, and sullen took her place;
Black horror saddenâd each celestial face.
To see the gathering grudge in every breast,
Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy expressâd;
While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent,
Sat stedfast care, and lowering discontent.
Thus she proceedsââAttend, ye powers above!
But know, âtis madness to contest with Jove:
Supreme he sits; and sees, in pride of sway.
Your vassal godheads grudgingly obey:
Fierce in the majesty of power controls;
Shakes all the thrones of heaven, and bends the poles.
Submiss, immortals! all he wills, obey:
And thou, great Mars, begin and show the way.
Behold Ascalaphus! behold him die,
But dare not murmur, dare not vent a sigh;
Thy own loved boasted offspring lies oâerthrown,
If that loved boasted offspring be thy own.â

Stern Mars, with anguish for his slaughterâd son,
Smote his rebelling breast, and fierce begun:
âThus then, immortals! thus shall Mars obey;
Forgive me, gods, and yield my vengeance way:
Descending first to yon forbidden plain,
The god of battles dares avenge the slain;
Dares, though the thunder bursting oâer my head
Should hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead.â

With that he gives command to Fear and Flight
To join his rapid coursers for the fight:
Then grim in arms, with hasty vengeance flies;
Arms that reflect a radiance through the skies.
And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven,
Discharged his wrath on half the host of heaven;
But Pallas, springing through the bright abode,
Starts from her azure throne to calm the god.
Struck for the immortal race with timely fear,
From frantic Mars she snatchâd the shield and spear;
Then the huge helmet lifting from his head,
Thus to the impetuous homicide she said:

âBy what wild passion, furious! art thou tossâd?
Strivâst thou with Jove? thou art already lost.
Shall not the Thundererâs dread command restrain,
And was imperial Juno heard in vain?
Back to the skies wouldst thou with shame be driven,
And in thy guilt involve the host of heaven?
Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage,
The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage;
Guilty and guiltless find an equal fate
And one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state.
Cease then thy offspringâs death unjust to call;
Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
Why should heavenâs law with foolish man comply
Exempted from the race ordainâd to die?â

This menace fixâd the warrior to his throne;
Sullen he sat, and curbâd the rising groan.
Then Juno callâd (Joveâs orders to obey)
The winged Iris, and the god of day.
âGo wait the Thundererâs will (Saturnia cried)
On yon tall summit of the fountful Ide:
There in the fatherâs awful presence stand,
Receive, and execute his dread command.â

She said, and sat; the god that gilds the day,
And various Iris, wing their airy way.
Swift as the wind, to Idaâs hills they came,
(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game)
There sat the eternal; he whose nod controls
The trembling world, and shakes the steady poles.
Veilâd in a mist of fragrance him they found,
With clouds of gold and purple circled round.
Well-pleased the Thunderer saw their earnest care,
And prompt obedience to the queen of air;
Then (while a smile serenes his awful brow)
Commands the goddess of the showery bow:

âIris! descend, and what we here ordain,
Report to yon mad tyrant of the main.
Bid him from fight to his own deeps repair,
Or breathe from slaughter in the fields of air.
If he refuse, then let him timely weigh
Our elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms,
If heavenâs omnipotence descend in arms?
Strives he with me, by whom his power was given,
And is there equal to the lord of heaven?â

The all-mighty spoke; the goddess wingâd her flight
To sacred Ilion from the Idaean height.
Swift as the rattling hail, or fleecy snows,
Drive through the skies, when Boreas fiercely blows;
So from the clouds descending Iris falls,
And to blue Neptune thus the goddess calls:

âAttend the mandate of the sire above!
In me behold the messenger of Jove:
He bids thee from forbidden wars repair
To thine own deeps, or to the fields of air.
This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh
His elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarms
If heavenâs omnipotence descend in arms?
Strivâst thou with him by whom all power is given?
And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?â

âWhat means the haughty sovereign of the skies?
(The king of ocean thus, incensed, replies;)
Rule as he will his portionâd realms on high;
No vassal god, nor of his train, am I.
Three brother deities from Saturn came,
And ancient Rhea, earthâs immortal dame:
Assignâd by lot, our triple rule we know;
Infernal Pluto sways the shades below;
Oâer the wide clouds, and oâer the starry plain,
Ethereal Jove extends his high domain;
My court beneath the hoary waves I keep,
And hush the roarings of the sacred deep;
Olympus, and this earth, in common lie:
What claim has here the tyrant of the sky?
Far in the distant clouds let him control,
And awe the younger brothers of the pole;
There to his children his commands be given,
The trembling, servile, second race of heaven.â

âAnd must I then (said she), O sire of floods!
Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods?
Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent;
A noble mind disdains not to repent.
To elder brothers guardian fiends are given,
To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven.â

âGreat is the profit (thus the god rejoinâd)
When ministers are blest with prudent mind:
Warnâd by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield,
And quit, though angry, the contended field:
Not but his threats with justice I disclaim,
The same our honours, and our birth the same.
If yet, forgetful of his promise given
To Hermes, Pallas, and the queen of heaven,
To favour Ilion, that perfidious place,
He breaks his faith with half the ethereal race;
Give him to know, unless the Grecian train
Lay yon proud structures level with the plain,
Howeâer the offence by other gods be passâd,
The wrath of Neptune shall for ever last.â

Thus speaking, furious from the field he strode,
And plunged into the bosom of the flood.
The lord of thunders, from his lofty height
Beheld, and thus bespoke the source of light:

âBehold! the god whose liquid arms are hurlâd
Around the globe, whose earthquakes rock the world,
Desists at length his rebel-war to wage,
Seeks his own seas, and trembles at our rage;
Else had my wrath, heavenâs thrones all shaking round,
Burnâd to the bottom of his seas profound;
And all the gods that round old Saturn dwell
Had heard the thunders to the deeps of hell.
Well was the crime, and well the vengeance spared;
Even power immense had found such battle hard.
Go thou, my son! the trembling Greeks alarm,
Shake my broad aegis on thy active arm,
Be godlike Hector thy peculiar care,
Swell his bold heart, and urge his strength to war:
Let Ilion conquer, till the Achaian train
Fly to their ships and Hellespont again:
Then Greece shall breathe from toils.â The godhead said;
His will divine the son of Jove obeyâd.
Not half so swift the sailing falcon flies,
That drives a turtle through the liquid skies,
As PhÅbus, shooting from the Idaean brow,
Glides down the mountain to the plain below.
There Hector seated by the stream he sees,
His sense returning with the coming breeze;
Again his pulses beat, his spirits rise;
Again his loved companions meet his eyes;
Jove thinking of his pains, they passâd away,
To whom the god who gives the golden day:

âWhy sits great Hector from the field so far?
What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?â

The fainting hero, as the vision bright
Stood shining oâer him, half unsealâd his sight:

âWhat blest immortal, with commanding breath,
Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death?
Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword
Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored,
The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow
Had almost sunk me to the shades below?
Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy,
And hellâs black horrors swim before my eye.â

To him Apollo: âBe no more dismayâd;
See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.
Behold! thy PhÅbus shall his arms employ,
PhÅbus, propitious still to thee and Troy.
Inspire thy warriors then with manly force,
And to the ships impel thy rapid horse:
Even I will make thy fiery coursers way,
And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea.â

Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove,
And breathed immortal ardour from above.
As when the pamperâd steed, with reins unbound,
Breaks from his stall, and pours along the ground;
With ample strokes he rushes to the flood,
To bathe his sides, and cool his fiery blood;
His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies;
His mane dishevellâd oâer his shoulders flies:
He snuffs the females in the well-known plain,
And springs, exulting, to his fields again:
Urged by the voice divine, thus Hector flew,
Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue.
As when the force of men and dogs combined
Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind;
Far from the hunterâs rage secure they lie
Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die)
When lo! a lion shoots across the way!
They fly: at once the chasers and the prey.
So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued,
And markâd their progress through the ranks in blood,
Soon as they see the furious chief appear,
Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear.

Thoas with grief observed his dreadful course,
Thoas, the bravest of the Ãtolian force;
Skillâd to direct the javelinâs distant flight,
And bold to combat in the standing fight,
Not more in councils famed for solid sense,
Than winning words and heavenly eloquence.
âGods! what portent (he cried) these eyes invades?
Lo! Hector rises from the Stygian shades!
We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax killâd:
What god restores him to the frighted field;
And not content that half of Greece lie slain,
Pours new destruction on her sons again?
He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful will;
Lo! still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!
Yet hear my counsel, and his worst withstand:
The Greeksâ main body to the fleet command;
But let the few whom brisker spirits warm,
Stand the first onset, and provoke the storm.
Thus point your arms; and when such foes appear,
Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to fear.â

The warrior spoke; the listening Greeks obey,
Thickening their ranks, and form a deep array.

Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion gave command,
The valiant leader of the Cretan band;
And Mars-like Meges: these the chiefs excite,
Approach the foe, and meet the coming fight.
Behind, unnumberâd multitudes attend,
To flank the navy, and the shores defend.
Full on the front the pressing Trojans bear,
And Hector first came towering to the war.
PhÅbus himself the rushing battle led;
A veil of clouds involved his radiant head:
High held before him, Joveâs enormous shield
Portentous shone, and shaded all the field;
Vulcan to Jove the immortal gift consignâd,
To scatter hosts and terrify mankind,
The Greeks expect the shock, the clamours rise
From different parts, and mingle in the skies.
Dire was the hiss of darts, by heroes flung,
And arrows leaping from the bow-string sung;
These drink the life of generous warriors slain:
Those guiltless fall, and thirst for blood in vain.
As long as PhÅbus bore unmoved the shield,
Sat doubtful conquest hovering oâer the field;
But when aloft he shakes it in the skies,
Shouts in their ears, and lightens in their eyes,
Deep horror seizes every Grecian breast,
Their force is humbled, and their fear confessâd.
So flies a herd of oxen, scatterâd wide,
No swain to guard them, and no day to guide,
When two fell lions from the mountain come,
And spread the carnage through the shady gloom.
Impending PhÅbus pours around them fear,
And Troy and Hector thunder in the rear.
Heaps fall on heaps: the slaughter Hector leads,
First great Arcesilas, then Stichius bleeds;
One to the bold BÅotians ever dear,
And one Menestheusâ friend and famed compeer.
Medon and Iasus, Ãneas sped;
This sprang from Phelus, and the Athenians led;
But hapless Medon from Oileus came;
Him Ajax honourâd with a brotherâs name,
Though born of lawless love: from home expellâd,
A banishâd man, in Phylace he dwellâd,
Pressâd by the vengeance of an angry wife;
Troy ends at last his labours and his life.
Mecystes next Polydamas oâerthrew;
And thee, brave Clonius, great Agenor slew.
By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies,
Pierced through the shoulder as he basely flies.
Politesâ arm laid Echius on the plain;
Stretchâd on one heap, the victors spoil the slain.
The Greeks dismayâd, confused, disperse or fall,
Some seek the trench, some skulk behind the wall.
While these fly trembling, others pant for breath,
And oâer the slaughter stalks gigantic death.
On rushâd bold Hector, gloomy as the night;
Forbids to plunder, animates the fight,
Points to the fleet: âFor, by the gods! who flies,[240]
Who dares but linger, by this hand he dies;
No weeping sister his cold eye shall close,
No friendly hand his funeral pyre compose.
Who stops to plunder at this signal hour,
The birds shall tear him, and the dogs devour.â
Furious he said; the smarting scourge resounds;
The coursers fly; the smoking chariot bounds;
The hosts rush on; loud clamours shake the shore;
The horses thunder, earth and ocean roar!
Apollo, planted at the trenchâs bound,
Pushâd at the bank: down sank the enormous mound:
Rollâd in the ditch the heapy ruin lay;
A sudden road! a long and ample way.
Oâer the dread fosse (a late impervious space)
Now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass.
The wondering crowds the downward level trod;
Before them flamed the shield, and marchâd the god.
Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall;
And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall:
Easy as when ashore an infant stands,
And draws imagined houses in the sands;
The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play,
Sweeps the slight works and fashionâd domes away:
Thus vanishâd at thy touch, the towers and walls;
The toil of thousands in a moment falls.

The Grecians gaze around with wild despair,
Confused, and weary all the powers with prayer:
Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands;
And urge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands.
Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies,
And weeps his country with a fatherâs eyes.

âO Jove! if ever, on his native shore,
One Greek enrichâd thy shrine with offerâd gore;
If eâer, in hope our country to behold,
We paid the fattest firstlings of the fold;
If eâer thou signâst our wishes with thy nod:
Perform the promise of a gracious god!
This day preserve our navies from the flame,
And save the relics of the Grecian name.â

Thus prayed the sage: the eternal gave consent,
And peals of thunder shook the firmament.
Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting sign,
And catchâd new fury at the voice divine.
As, when black tempests mix the seas and skies,
The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise,
Above the sides of some tall ship ascend,
Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they rend:
Thus loudly roaring, and oâerpowering all,
Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian wall;
Legions on legions from each side arise:
Thick sound the keels; the storm of arrows flies.
Fierce on the ships above, the cars below,
These wield the mace, and those the javelin throw.

While thus the thunder of the battle raged,
And labouring armies round the works engaged,
Still in the tent Patroclus sat to tend
The good Eurypylus, his wounded friend.
He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind,
And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.
But when he saw, ascending up the fleet,
Victorious Troy; then, starting from his seat,
With bitter groans his sorrows he expressâd,
He wrings his hands, he beats his manly breast.
âThough yet thy state require redress (he cries)
Depart I must: what horrors strike my eyes!
Charged with Achillesâ high command I go,
A mournful witness of this scene of woe;
I haste to urge him by his countryâs care
To rise in arms, and shine again in war.
Perhaps some favouring god his soul may bend;
The voice is powerful of a faithful friend.â

He spoke; and, speaking, swifter than the wind
Sprung from the tent, and left the war behind.
The embodied Greeks the fierce attack sustain,
But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain:
Nor could the Trojans, through that firm array,
Force to the fleet and tents the impervious way.
As when a shipwright, with Palladian art,
Smooths the rough wood, and levels every part;
With equal hand he guides his whole design,
By the just rule, and the directing line:
The martial leaders, with like skill and care,
Preserved their line, and equal kept the war.
Brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were tried,
And every ship sustained an equal tide.
At one proud bark, high-towering oâer the fleet,
Ajax the great, and godlike Hector meet;
For one bright prize the matchless chiefs contend,
Nor this the ships can fire, nor that defend:
One kept the shore, and one the vessel trod;
That fixâd as fate, this acted by a god.
The son of Clytius in his daring hand,
The deck approaching, shakes a flaming brand;
But, pierced by Telamonâs huge lance, expires:
Thundering he falls, and drops the extinguishâd fires.
Great Hector viewâd him with a sad survey,
As stretchâd in dust before the stern he lay.
âOh! all of Trojan, all of Lycian race!
Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space:
Lo! where the son of royal Clytius lies;
Ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!â

This said, his eager javelin sought the foe:
But Ajax shunnâd the meditated blow.
Not vainly yet the forceful lance was thrown;
It stretchâd in dust unhappy Lycophron:
An exile long, sustainâd at Ajaxâ board,
A faithful servant to a foreign lord;
In peace, and war, for ever at his side,
Near his loved master, as he lived, he died.
From the high poop he tumbles on the sand,
And lies a lifeless load along the land.
With anguish Ajax views the piercing sight,
And thus inflames his brother to the fight:

âTeucer, behold! extended on the shore
Our friend, our loved companion! now no more!
Dear as a parent, with a parentâs care
To fight our wars he left his native air.
This death deplored, to Hectorâs rage we owe;
Revenge, revenge it on the cruel foe.
Where are those darts on which the fates attend?
And where the bow which PhÅbus taught to bend?â

Impatient Teucer, hastening to his aid,
Before the chief his ample bow displayâd;
The well-stored quiver on his shoulders hung:
Then hissâd his arrow, and the bowstring sung.
Clytus, Pisenorâs son, renownâd in fame,
(To thee, Polydamas! an honourâd name)
Drove through the thickest of the embattled plains
The startling steeds, and shook his eager reins.
As all on glory ran his ardent mind,
The pointed death arrests him from behind:
Through his fair neck the thrilling arrow flies;
In youthâs first bloom reluctantly he dies.
Hurlâd from the lofty seat, at distance far,
The headlong coursers spurn his empty car;
Till sad Polydamas the steeds restrainâd,
And gave, Astynous, to thy careful hand;
Then, fired to vengeance, rushâd amidst the foe:
Rage edged his sword, and strengthenâd every blow.

Once more bold Teucer, in his countryâs cause,
At Hectorâs breast a chosen arrow draws:
And had the weapon found the destined way,
Thy fall, great Trojan! had renownâd that day.
But Hector was not doomâd to perish then:
The all-wise disposer of the fates of men
(Imperial Jove) his present death withstands;
Nor was such glory due to Teucerâs hands.
At its full stretch as the tough string he drew,
Struck by an arm unseen, it burst in two;
Down droppâd the bow: the shaft with brazen head
Fell innocent, and on the dust lay dead.
The astonishâd archer to great Ajax cries;
âSome god prevents our destined enterprise:
Some god, propitious to the Trojan foe,
Has, from my arm unfailing, struck the bow,
And broke the nerve my hands had twined with art,
Strong to impel the flight of many a dart.â

âSince heaven commands it (Ajax made reply)
Dismiss the bow, and lay thy arrows by:
Thy arms no less suffice the lance to wield,
And quit the quiver for the ponderous shield.
In the first ranks indulge thy thirst of fame,
Thy brave example shall the rest inflame.
Fierce as they are, by long successes vain;
To force our fleet, or even a ship to gain,
Asks toil, and sweat, and blood: their utmost might
Shall find its matchâNo more: âtis ours to fight.â

Then Teucer laid his faithless bow aside;
The fourfold buckler oâer his shoulder tied;
On his brave head a crested helm he placed,
With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
A dart, whose point with brass refulgent shines,
The warrior wields; and his great brother joins.

This Hector saw, and thus expressâd his joy:
âYe troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!
Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame,
And spread your glory with the navyâs flame.
Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but now,
From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow:
Indulgent Jove! how plain thy favours shine,
When happy nations bear the marks divine!
How easy then, to see the sinking state
Of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
Such is the fate of Greece, and such is ours:
Behold, ye warriors, and exert your powers.
Death is the worst; a fate which all must try;
And for our country, âtis a bliss to die.
The gallant man, though slain in fight he be,
Yet leaves his nation safe, his children free;
Entails a debt on all the grateful state;
His own brave friends shall glory in his fate;
His wife live honourâd, all his race succeed,
And late posterity enjoy the deed!â

This roused the soul in every Trojan breast:
The godlike Ajax next his Greeks addressâd:

âHow long, ye warriors of the Argive race,
(To generous Argos what a dire disgrace!)
How long on these cursed confines will ye lie,
Yet undetermined, or to live or die?
What hopes remain, what methods to retire,
If once your vessels catch the Trojan fire?
Mark how the flames approach, how near they fall,
How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call!
Not to the dance that dreadful voice invites,
It calls to death, and all the rage of fights.
âTis now no time for wisdom or debates;
To your own hands are trusted all your fates;
And better far in one decisive strife,
One day should end our labour or our life,
Than keep this hard-got inch of barren sands,
Still pressâd, and pressâd by such inglorious hands.â

The listening Grecians feel their leaderâs flame,
And every kindling bosom pants for fame.
Then mutual slaughters spread on either side;
By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died;
There, pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas,
Chief of the foot, of old Antenorâs race.
Polydamas laid Otus on the sand,
The fierce commander of the Epeian band.
His lance bold Meges at the victor threw;
The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew;
(That valued life, O PhÅbus! was thy care)
But Croesmusâ bosom took the flying spear:
His corpse fell bleeding on the slippery shore;
His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore.
Dolops, the son of Lampus, rushes on,
Sprung from the race of old Laomedon,
And famed for prowess in a well-fought field,
He pierced the centre of his sounding shield:
But Meges, Phyleusâ ample breastplate wore,
(Well-known in fight on Selleâs winding shore;
For king Euphetes gave the golden mail,
Compact, and firm with many a jointed scale)
Which oft, in cities stormâd, and battles won,
Had saved the father, and now saves the son.
Full at the Trojanâs head he urged his lance,
Where the high plumes above the helmet dance,
New tingâd with Tyrian dye: in dust below,
Shorn from the crest, the purple honours glow.
Meantime their fight the Spartan king surveyâd,
And stood by Megesâ side a sudden aid.
Through Dolopsâ shoulder urged his forceful dart,
Which held its passage through the panting heart,
And issued at his breast. With thundering sound
The warrior falls, extended on the ground.
In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain:
But Hectorâs voice excites his kindred train;
The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung,
Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.
He (ere to Troy the Grecians crossâd the main)
Fed his large oxen on Percoteâs plain;
But when oppressâd, his country claimâd his care,
Returnâd to Ilion, and excellâd in war;
For this, in Priamâs court, he held his place,
Beloved no less than Priamâs royal race.
Him Hector singled, as his troops he led,
And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead.

âLo, Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies;
And is it thus our royal kinsman dies?
Oâermatchâd he falls; to two at once a prey,
And lo! they bear the bloody arms away!
Come onâa distant war no longer wage,
But hand to hand thy countryâs foes engage:
Till Greece at once, and all her glory end;
Or Ilion from her towery height descend,
Heaved from the lowest stone; and bury all
In one sad sepulchre, one common fall.â

Hector (this said) rushâd forward on the foes:
With equal ardour Melanippus glows:
Then Ajax thusââO Greeks! respect your fame,
Respect yourselves, and learn an honest shame:
Let mutual reverence mutual warmth inspire,
And catch from breast to breast the noble fire,
On valourâs side the odds of combat lie;
The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
The wretch that trembles in the field of fame,
Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame.â

His generous sense he not in vain imparts;
It sunk, and rooted in the Grecian hearts:
They join, they throng, they thicken at his call,
And flank the navy with a brazen wall;
Shields touching shields, in order blaze above,
And stop the Trojans, though impellâd by Jove.
The fiery Spartan first, with loud applause.
Warms the bold son of Nestor in his cause.
âIs there (he said) in arms a youth like you,
So strong to fight, so active to pursue?
Why stand you distant, nor attempt a deed?
Lift the bold lance, and make some Trojan bleed.â

He said; and backward to the lines retired;
Forth rushâd the youth with martial fury fired,
Beyond the foremost ranks; his lance he threw,
And round the black battalions cast his view.
The troops of Troy recede with sudden fear,
While the swift javelin hissâd along in air.
Advancing Melanippus met the dart
With his bold breast, and felt it in his heart:
Thundering he falls; his falling arms resound,
And his broad buckler rings against the ground.
The victor leaps upon his prostrate prize:
Thus on a roe the well-breathâd beagle flies,
And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the dart
The distant hunter sent into his heart.
Observing Hector to the rescue flew;
Bold as he was, Antilochus withdrew.
So when a savage, ranging oâer the plain,
Has torn the shepherdâs dog, or shepherdâs swain,
While conscious of the deed, he glares around,
And hears the gathering multitude resound,
Timely he flies the yet-untasted food,
And gains the friendly shelter of the wood:
So fears the youth; all Troy with shouts pursue,
While stones and darts in mingled tempest flew;
But enterâd in the Grecian ranks, he turns
His manly breast, and with new fury burns.

Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove,
Fierce to fulfil the stern decrees of Jove:
The sire of gods, confirming Thetisâ prayer,
The Grecian ardour quenchâd in deep despair;
But lifts to glory Troyâs prevailing bands,
Swells all their hearts, and strengthens all their hands.
On Idaâs top he waits with longing eyes,
To view the navy blazing to the skies;
Then, nor till then, the scale of war shall turn,
The Trojans fly, and conquerâd Ilion burn.
These fates revolved in his almighty mind,
He raises Hector to the work designâd,
Bids him with more than mortal fury glow,
And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.
So Mars, when human crimes for vengeance call,
Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies fall.
Not with more rage a conflagration rolls,
Wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles.
He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy brow
Like fiery meteors his red eye-balls glow:
The radiant helmet on his temple burns,
Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns:
For Jove his splendour round the chief had thrown,
And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one.
Unhappy glories! for his fate was near,
Due to stern Pallas, and Pelidesâ spear:
Yet Jove deferrâd the death he was to pay,
And gave what fate allowâd, the honours of a day!

Now all on fire for fame, his breast, his eyes
Burn at each foe, and single every prize;
Still at the closest ranks, the thickest fight,
He points his ardour, and exerts his might.
The Grecian phalanx, moveless as a tower,
On all sides batterâd, yet resists his power:
So some tall rock oâerhangs the hoary main,[241]
By winds assailâd, by billows beat in vain,
Unmoved it hears, above, the tempest blow,
And sees the watery mountains break below.
Girt in surrounding flames, he seems to fall
Like fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all:
Bursts as a wave that from the cloud impends,
And, swellâd with tempests, on the ship descends;
White are the decks with foam; the winds aloud
Howl oâer the masts, and sing through every shroud:
Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears;
And instant death on every wave appears.
So pale the Greeks the eyes of Hector meet,
The chief so thunders, and so shakes the fleet.

As when a lion, rushing from his den,
Amidst the plain of some wide-waterâd fen,
(Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed,
At large expatiate oâer the ranker mead)
Leaps on the herds before the herdsmanâs eyes;
The trembling herdsman far to distance flies;
Some lordly bull (the rest dispersed and fled)
He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.
Thus from the rage of Jove-like Hector flew
All Greece in heaps; but one he seized, and slew:
Mycenian Periphes, a mighty name,
In wisdom great, in arms well known to fame;
The minister of stern Eurystheusâ ire
Against Alcides, Copreus was his sire:
The son redeemâd the honours of the race,
A son as generous as the sire was base;
Oâer all his countryâs youth conspicuous far
In every virtue, or of peace or war:
But doomâd to Hectorâs stronger force to yield!
Against the margin of his ample shield
He struck his hasty foot: his heels up-sprung;
Supine he fell; his brazen helmet rung.
On the fallen chief the invading Trojan pressâd,
And plunged the pointed javelin in his breast.
His circling friends, who strove to guard too late
The unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate.

Chased from the foremost line, the Grecian train
Now man the next, receding toward the main:
Wedged in one body at the tents they stand,
Wallâd round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band.
Now manly shame forbids the inglorious flight;
Now fear itself confines them to the fight:
Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most
(The sage preserver of the Grecian host)
Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores;
And by their parents, by themselves implores.

âOh friends! be men: your generous breasts inflame
With mutual honour, and with mutual shame!
Think of your hopes, your fortunes; all the care
Your wives, your infants, and your parents share:
Think of each living fatherâs reverend head;
Think of each ancestor with glory dead;
Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue,
They ask their safety, and their fame, from you:
The gods their fates on this one action lay,
And all are lost, if you desert the day.â

He spoke, and round him breathed heroic fires;
Minerva seconds what the sage inspires.
The mist of darkness Jove around them threw
She clearâd, restoring all the war to view;
A sudden ray shot beaming oâer the plain,
And showâd the shores, the navy, and the main:
Hector they saw, and all who fly, or fight,
The scene wide-opening to the blaze of light,
First of the field great Ajax strikes their eyes,
His port majestic, and his ample size:
A ponderous mace with studs of iron crownâd,
Full twenty cubits long, he swings around;
Nor fights, like others, fixâd to certain stands
But looks a moving tower above the bands;
High on the decks with vast gigantic stride,
The godlike hero stalks from side to side.
So when a horseman from the watery mead
(Skillâd in the manage of the bounding steed)
Drives four fair coursers, practised to obey,
To some great city through the public way;
Safe in his art, as side by side they run,
He shifts his seat, and vaults from one to one;
And now to this, and now to that he flies;
Admiring numbers follow with their eyes.

From ship to ship thus Ajax swiftly flew,
No less the wonder of the warring crew.
As furious, Hector thunderâd threats aloud,
And rushâd enraged before the Trojan crowd;
Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky prores
Lay rankâd contiguous on the bending shores;
So the strong eagle from his airy height,
Who marks the swansâ or cranesâ embodied flight,
Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food,
And, stooping, darkens with his wings the flood.
Jove leads him on with his almighty hand,
And breathes fierce spirits in his following band.
The warring nations meet, the battle roars,
Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.
Thou wouldst have thought, so furious was their fire,
No force could tame them, and no toil could tire;
As if new vigour from new fights they won,
And the long battle was but then begun.
Greece, yet unconquerâd, kept alive the war,
Secure of death, confiding in despair:
Troy in proud hopes already viewâd the main
Bright with the blaze, and red with heroes slain:
Like strength is felt from hope, and from despair,
And each contends, as his were all the war.

âTwas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless hand
First seized a ship on that contested strand;
The same which dead ProtesilaÃ¼s bore,[242]
The first that touchâd the unhappy Trojan shore:
For this in arms the warring nations stood,
And bathed their generous breasts with mutual blood.
No room to poise the lance or bend the bow;
But hand to hand, and man to man, they grow:
Wounded, they wound; and seek each otherâs hearts
With falchions, axes, swords, and shortenâd darts.
The falchions ring, shields rattle, axes sound,
Swords flash in air, or glitter on the ground;
With streaming blood the slippery shores are dyed,
And slaughterâd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

Still raging, Hector with his ample hand
Grasps the high stern, and gives this loud command:


[Illustration: ] AJAX DEFENDING THE GREEK SHIPS


âHaste, bring the flames! that toil of ten long years
Is finished; and the day desired appears!
This happy day with acclamations greet,
Bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet.
The coward-counsels of a timorous throng
Of reverend dotards checkâd our glory long:
Too long Jove lullâd us with lethargic charms,
But now in peals of thunder calls to arms:
In this great day he crowns our full desires,
Wakes all our force, and seconds all our fires.â

He spokeâthe warriors at his fierce command
Pour a new deluge on the Grecian band.
Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javelins fly,)
Steppâd back, and doubted or to live or die.
Yet, where the oars are placed, he stands to wait
What chief approaching dares attempt his fate:
Even to the last his naval charge defends,
Now shakes his spear, now lifts, and now protends;
Even yet, the Greeks with piercing shouts inspires,
Amidst attacks, and deaths, and darts, and fires.

âO friends! O heroes! names for ever dear,
Once sons of Mars, and thunderbolts of war!
Ah! yet be mindful of your old renown,
Your great forefathersâ virtues and your own.
What aids expect you in this utmost strait?
What bulwarks rising between you and fate?
No aids, no bulwarks your retreat attend,
No friends to help, no city to defend.
This spot is all you have, to lose or keep;
There stand the Trojans, and here rolls the deep.
âTis hostile ground you tread; your native lands
Far, far from hence: your fates are in your hands.â

Raging he spoke; nor further wastes his breath,
But turns his javelin to the work of death.
Whateâer bold Trojan armâd his daring hands,
Against the sable ships, with flaming brands,
So well the chief his naval weapon sped,
The luckless warrior at his stern lay dead:
Full twelve, the boldest, in a moment fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.


[Illustration: ] CASTOR AND POLLUX




BOOK XVI.


ARGUMENT


THE SIXTH BATTLE, THE ACTS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS


Patroclus (in pursuance of the request of Nestor in the eleventh book)
entreats Achilles to suffer him to go to the assistance of the Greeks
with Achillesâ troops and armour. He agrees to it, but at the same time
charges him to content himself with rescuing the fleet, without further
pursuit of the enemy. The armour, horses, soldiers, and officers are
described. Achilles offers a libation for the success of his friend,
after which Patroclus leads the Myrmidons to battle. The Trojans, at
the sight of Patroclus in Achillesâ armour, taking him for that hero,
are cast into the uttermost consternation; he beats them off from the
vessels, Hector himself flies, Sarpedon is killed, though Jupiter was
averse to his fate. Several other particulars of the battle are
described; in the heat of which, Patroclus, neglecting the orders of
Achilles, pursues the foe to the walls of Troy, where Apollo repulses
and disarms him, Euphorbus wounds him, and Hector kills him, which
concludes the book.


So warrâd both armies on the ensanguined shore,
While the black vessels smoked with human gore.
Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies;
The streaming tears fall copious from his eyes.
Not faster, trickling to the plains below,
From the tall rock the sable waters flow.
Divine Pelides, with compassion moved.
Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:[243]

âPatroclus, say, what grief thy bosom bears,
That flows so fast in these unmanly tears?
No girl, no infant whom the mother keeps
From her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps;
Not more the motherâs soul, that infant warms,
Clung to her knees, and reaching at her arms,
Than thou hast mine! Oh tell me, to what end
Thy melting sorrows thus pursue thy friend?

âGrievâst thou for me, or for my martial band?
Or come sad tidings from our native land?
Our fathers live (our first, most tender care),
Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital air,
And hoary Peleus yet extends his days;
Pleased in their age to hear their childrenâs praise.
Or may some meaner cause thy pity claim?
Perhaps yon relics of the Grecian name,
Doomâd in their ships to sink by fire and sword,
And pay the forfeit of their haughty lord?
Whateâer the cause, reveal thy secret care,
And speak those sorrows which a friend would share.â
A sigh that instant from his bosom broke,
Another followâd, and Patroclus spoke:

âLet Greece at length with pity touch thy breast,
Thyself a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!
Lo! every chief that might her fate prevent,
Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent:
Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreusâ son,
And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan,
More for their countryâs wounds than for their own.
Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease,
Thy breast alone no lenitives appease.
May never rage like thine my soul enslave,
O great in vain! unprofitably brave!
Thy country slighted in her last distress,
What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress?
Noâmen unborn, and ages yet behind,
Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind.

âO man unpitying! if of man thy race;
But sure thou springâst not from a soft embrace,
Nor ever amorous hero caused thy birth,
Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth:
Some rugged rockâs hard entrails gave thee form,
And raging seas produced thee in a storm,
A soul well suiting that tempestuous kind,
So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind.

âIf some dire oracle thy breast alarm,
If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm,
Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
If I but lead the Myrmidonian line:
Clad in thy dreadful arms if I appear,
Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the war;
Without thy person Greece shall win the day,
And thy mere image chase her foes away.
Pressâd by fresh forces, her oâerlabourâd train
Shall quit the ships, and Greece respire again.â
Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath,
Thou beggâst his arms, and in his arms thy death.
Unfortunately good! a boding sigh
Thy friend returnâd; and with it, this reply:
âPatroclus! thy Achilles knows no fears;
Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears;
Nor aught a motherâs caution can suggest;
The tyrantâs pride lies rooted in my breast.
My wrongs, my wrongs, my constant thought engage,
Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage:
I made him tyrant: gave him power to wrong
Even me: I felt it; and shall feel it long.
The maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away,
Due to the toils of many a well-fought day;
Due to my conquest of her fatherâs reign;
Due to the votes of all the Grecian train.
From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave,
Disgraced, dishonourâd, like the meanest slave.
But bear we thisâthe wrongs I grieve are past;
âTis time our fury should relent at last:
I fixâd its date; the day I wishâd appears:
How Hector to my ships his battle bears,
The flames my eyes, the shouts invade my ears.
Go then, Patroclus! court fair honourâs charms
In Troyâs famed fields, and in Achillesâ arms:
Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight,
Go save the fleets, and conquer in my right.
See the thin relics of their baffled band
At the last edge of yon deserted land!
Behold all Ilion on their ships descends;
How the cloud blackens, how the storm impends!
It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed,
Troy saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed:
Had not the injurious king our friendship lost,
Yon ample trench had buried half her host.
No camps, no bulwarks now the Trojans fear,
Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there;
No longer flames the lance of Tydeusâ son;
No more your general calls his heroes on:
Hector, alone, I hear; his dreadful breath
Commands your slaughter, or proclaims your death.
Yet now, Patroclus, issue to the plain:
Now save the ships, the rising fires restrain,
And give the Greeks to visit Greece again.
But heed my words, and mark a friendâs command,
Who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand,
And from thy deeds expects the Achaian host
Shall render back the beauteous maid he lost:
Rage uncontrollâd through all the hostile crew,
But touch not Hector, Hector is my due.
Though Jove in thunder should command the war,
Be just, consult my glory, and forbear.
The fleet once saved, desist from further chase,
Nor lead to Ilionâs walls the Grecian race;
Some adverse god thy rashness may destroy;
Some god, like PhÅbus, ever kind to Troy.
Let Greece, redeemâd from this destructive strait,
Do her own work; and leave the rest to fate.
O! would to all the immortal powers above,
Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!
That not one Trojan might be left alive,
And not a Greek of all the race survive:
Might only we the vast destruction shun,
And only we destroy the accursed town!â
Such conference held the chiefs; while on the strand
Great Jove with conquest crownâd the Trojan band.
Ajax no more the sounding storm sustainâd,
So thick the darts an iron tempest rainâd:
On his tired arm the weighty buckler hung;
His hollow helm with falling javelins rung;
His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes;
And painful sweat from all his members flows.
Spent and oâerpowerâd, he barely breathes at most;
Yet scarce an army stirs him from his post;
Dangers on dangers all around him glow,
And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe.

Say, Muses, throned above the starry frame,
How first the navy blazed with Trojan flame?

Stern Hector waved his sword, and standing near,
Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear,
Full on the lance a stroke so justly sped,
That the broad falchion loppâd its brazen head;
His pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain;
The brazen head falls sounding on the plain.
Great Ajax saw, and ownâd the hand divine;
Confessing Jove, and trembling at the sign,
Warnâd he retreats. Then swift from all sides pour
The hissing brands; thick streams the fiery shower;
Oâer the high stern the curling volumes rise,
And sheets of rolling smoke involve the skies.

Divine Achilles viewâd the rising flames,
And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims:
âArm, arm, Patroclus! Lo, the blaze aspires!
The glowing ocean reddens with the fires.
Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame;
Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name;
I haste to bring the troops.ââThe hero said;
The friend with ardour and with joy obeyâd.

He cased his limbs in brass; and first around
His manly legs, with silver buckles bound
The clasping greaves; then to his breast applies
The flaming cuirass of a thousand dyes;
Emblazed with studs of gold his falchion shone
In the rich belt, as in a starry zone:
Achillesâ shield his ample shoulders spread,
Achillesâ helmet nodded oâer his head:
Adornâd in all his terrible array,
He flashâd around intolerable day.
Alone untouchâd, Pelidesâ javelin stands,
Not to be poised but by Pelidesâ hands:
From Pelionâs shady brow the plant entire
Old Chiron rent, and shaped it for his sire;
Whose sonâs great arm alone the weapon wields,
The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.


[Illustration: ] Buckles


The brave Automedon (an honourâd name,
The second to his lord in love and fame,
In peace his friend, and partner of the war)
The winged coursers harnessâd to the car;
Xanthus and Balius, of immortal breed,
Sprung from the wind, and like the wind in speed.
Whom the wingâd harpy, swift Podarge, bore,
By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy shore:
Swift Pedasus was added to their side,
(Once great AÃ«tionâs, now Achillesâ pride)
Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace,
A mortal courser matchâd the immortal race.

Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms
His hardy Myrmidons to blood and arms.
All breathing death, around the chief they stand,
A grim, terrific, formidable band:
Grim as voracious wolves, that seek the springs[244]
When scalding thirst their burning bowels wrings;
When some tall stag, fresh-slaughtered in the wood,
Has drenchâd their wide insatiate throats with blood,
To the black fount they rush, a hideous throng,
With paunch distended, and with lolling tongue,
Fire fills their eye, their black jaws belch the gore,
And gorged with slaughter still they thirst for more.
Like furious, rushâd the Myrmidonian crew,
Such their dread strength, and such their deathful view.

High in the midst the great Achilles stands,
Directs their order, and the war commands.
He, loved of Jove, had launchâd for Ilionâs shores
Full fifty vessels, mannâd with fifty oars:
Five chosen leaders the fierce bands obey,
Himself supreme in valour, as in sway.

First marchâd Menestheus, of celestial birth,
Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth,
Divine Sperchius! Jove-descended flood!
A mortal mother mixing with a god.
Such was Menestheus, but miscallâd by fame
The son of Borus, that espoused the dame.

Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay,
Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day.
Her, sly Cellenius loved: on her would gaze,
As with swift step she formâd the running maze:
To her high chamber from Dianaâs quire,
The god pursued her, urged, and crownâd his fire.
The son confessâd his fatherâs heavenly race,
And heirâd his motherâs swiftness in the chase.
Strong Echecleus, blessâd in all those charms
That pleased a god, succeeded to her arms;
Not conscious of those loves, long hid from fame,
With gifts of price he sought and won the dame;
Her secret offspring to her sire she bare;
Her sire caressâd him with a parentâs care.

Pisander followâd; matchless in his art
To wing the spear, or aim the distant dart;
No hand so sure of all the Emathian line,
Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.

The fourth by PhÅnixâ grave command was graced,
Laercesâ valiant offspring led the last.

Soon as Achilles with superior care
Had callâd the chiefs, and orderâd all the war,
This stern remembrance to his troops he gave:
âYe far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave!
Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng,
Think what reproach these ears endured so long;
âStern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say,
While restless, raging, in your ships you lay)
Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to yield;
Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field:
If that dire fury must for ever burn,
What make we here? Return, ye chiefs, return!â
Such were your wordsâNow, warriors! grieve no more,
Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore!
This day shall give you all your soul demands,
Glut all your hearts, and weary all your hands!â


[Illustration: ] DIANA


Thus while he roused the fire in every breast,
Close and more close the listening cohorts pressâd;
Ranks wedged in ranks; of arms a steely ring
Still grows, and spreads, and thickens round the king.
As when a circling wall the builder forms,
Of strength defensive against wind and storms,
Compacted stones the thickening work compose,
And round him wide the rising structure grows:
So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng,
Shield urged on shield, and man drove man along;
Thick, undistinguishâd plumes, together joinâd,
Float in one sea, and wave before the wind.

Far oâer the rest in glittering pomp appear,
There bold Automedon, Patroclus here;
Brothers in arms, with equal fury fired;
Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired.

But mindful of the gods, Achilles went
To the rich coffer in his shady tent;
There lay on heaps his various garments rollâd,
And costly furs, and carpets stiff with gold,
(The presents of the silver-footed dame)
From thence he took a bowl, of antique frame,
Which never man had stained with ruddy wine,
Nor raised in offerings to the power divine,
But Peleusâ son; and Peleusâ son to none
Had raised in offerings, but to Jove alone.
This tinged with sulphur, sacred first to flame,
He purged; and washâd it in the running stream.
Then cleansed his hands; and fixing for a space
His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the place
Of sacrifice, the purple draught he pourâd
Forth in the midst; and thus the god implored:

âO thou supreme! high-throned all height above!
O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!
Who âmidst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill,
Presidâst on bleak Dodonaâs vocal hill:
(Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround,
Their feet unwashâd, their slumbers on the ground;
Who hear, from rustling oaks, thy dark decrees;
And catch the fates, low-whispered in the breeze;)
Hear, as of old! Thou gavâst, at Thetisâ prayer,
Glory to me, and to the Greeks despair.
Lo, to the dangers of the fighting field
The best, the dearest of my friends, I yield,
Though still determined, to my ships confined;
Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind.
Oh! be his guard thy providential care,
Confirm his heart, and string his arm to war:
Pressâd by his single force let Hector see
His fame in arms not owing all to me.
But when the fleets are saved from foes and fire,
Let him with conquest and renown retire;
Preserve his arms, preserve his social train,
And safe return him to these eyes again!â

Great Jove consents to half the chiefâs request,
But heavenâs eternal doom denies the rest;
To free the fleet was granted to his prayer;
His safe return, the winds dispersed in air.
Back to his tent the stern Achilles flies,
And waits the combat with impatient eyes.

Meanwhile the troops beneath Patroclusâ care,
Invade the Trojans, and commence the war.
As wasps, provoked by children in their play,
Pour from their mansions by the broad highway,
In swarms the guiltless traveller engage,
Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage:
All rise in arms, and, with a general cry,
Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny.
Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms,
So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms:
Their rising rage Patroclusâ breath inspires,
Who thus inflames them with heroic fires:

âO warriors, partners of Achillesâ praise!
Be mindful of your deeds in ancient days;
Your godlike master let your acts proclaim,
And add new glories to his mighty name.
Think your Achilles sees you fight: be brave,
And humble the proud monarch whom you save.â

Joyful they heard, and kindling as he spoke,
Flew to the fleet, involved in fire and smoke.
From shore to shore the doubling shouts resound,
The hollow ships return a deeper sound.
The war stood still, and all around them gazed,
When great Achillesâ shining armour blazed:
Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh,
At once they see, they tremble, and they fly.

Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus! flew,
Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.
Close to the stern of that famed ship which bore
Unblessâd Protesilaus to Ilionâs shore,
The great Paeonian, bold Pyrechmes stood;
(Who led his bands from Axiusâ winding flood;)
His shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound;
The groaning warrior pants upon the ground.
His troops, that see their countryâs glory slain,
Fly diverse, scatterâd oâer the distant plain.
Patroclusâ arm forbids the spreading fires,
And from the half-burnâd ship proud Troy retires;
Clearâd from the smoke the joyful navy lies;
In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies;
Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends,
And loud acclaim the starry region rends.
So when thick clouds enwrap the mountainâs head,
Oâer heavenâs expanse like one black ceiling spread;
Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray,
Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day:
The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise,
And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes;
The smiling scene wide opens to the sight,
And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.

But Troy repulsed, and scatterâd oâer the plains,
Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.
Now every Greek some hostile hero slew,
But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew:
As Areilycus had turnâd him round,
Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound;
The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown,
The thigh transfixâd, and broke the brittle bone:
Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance;
Thy breast, unarmâd, received the Spartan lance.
Phylidesâ dart (as Amphidus drew nigh)
His blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh,
Tore all the brawn, and rent the nerves away;
In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay.

In equal arms two sons of Nestor stand,
And two bold brothers of the Lycian band:
By great Antilochus, Atymnius dies,
Pierced in the flank, lamented youth! he lies,
Kind Maris, bleeding in his brotherâs wound,
Defends the breathless carcase on the ground;
Furious he flies, his murderer to engage:
But godlike Thrasimed prevents his rage,
Between his arm and shoulder aims a blow;
His arm falls spouting on the dust below:
He sinks, with endless darkness coverâd oâer:
And vents his soul, effused with gushing gore.

Slain by two brothers, thus two brothers bleed,
Sarpedonâs friends, Amisodarusâ seed;
Amisodarus, who, by Furies led,
The bane of men, abhorrâd Chimaera bred;
Skillâd in the dart in vain, his sons expire,
And pay the forfeit of their guilty sire.

Stoppâd in the tumult Cleobulus lies,
Beneath Oileusâ arm, a living prize;
A living prize not long the Trojan stood;
The thirsty falchion drank his reeking blood:
Plunged in his throat the smoking weapon lies;
Black death, and fate unpitying, seal his eyes.

Amid the ranks, with mutual thirst of fame,
Lycon the brave, and fierce Peneleus came;
In vain their javelins at each other flew,
Now, met in arms, their eager swords they drew.
On the plumed crest of his BÅotian foe
The daring Lycon aimâd a noble blow;
The sword broke short; but his, Peneleus sped
Full on the juncture of the neck and head:
The head, divided by a stroke so just,
Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust.

Oâertaken Neamas by Merion bleeds,
Pierced through the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
Back from the car he tumbles to the ground:
His swimming eyes eternal shades surround.

Next Erymas was doomâd his fate to feel,
His openâd mouth received the Cretan steel:
Beneath the brain the point a passage tore,
Crashâd the thin bones, and drownâd the teeth in gore:
His mouth, his eyes, his nostrils, pour a flood;
He sobs his soul out in the gush of blood.

As when the flocks neglected by the swain,
Or kids, or lambs, lie scatterâd oâer the plain,
A troop of wolves the unguarded charge survey,
And rend the trembling, unresisting prey:
Thus on the foe the Greeks impetuous came;
Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame.

But still at Hector godlike Ajax aimâd,
Still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed.
The Trojan chief, experienced in the field,
Oâer his broad shoulders spread the massy shield,
Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour,
And on his buckler caught the ringing shower:
He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise,
Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved allies.

As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms,
And rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms,
Dark oâer the fields the ascending vapour flies,
And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies:
So from the ships, along the dusky plain,
Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train.
Even Hector fled; through heads of disarray
The fiery coursers forced their lord away:
While far behind his Trojans fall confused;
Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage bruised:
Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokes
Shock; while the madding steeds break short their yokes.
In vain they labour up the steepy mound;
Their charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies;
Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies;
Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight;
Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatchâd from sight.
The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down,
Scour oâer the fields, and stretch to reach the town.
Loud oâer the rout was heard the victorâs cry,
Where the war bleeds, and where the thickest die,
Where horse and arms, and chariots lie oâerthrown,
And bleeding heroes under axles groan.
No stop, no check, the steeds of Peleus knew:
From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew.
High-bounding oâer the fosse, the whirling car
Smokes through the ranks, oâertakes the flying war,
And thunders after Hector; Hector flies,
Patroclus shakes his lance; but fate denies.
Not with less noise, with less impetuous force,
The tide of Trojans urge their desperate course,
Than when in autumn Jove his fury pours,
And earth is loaden with incessant showers;
(When guilty mortals break the eternal laws,
Or judges, bribed, betray the righteous cause;)
From their deep beds he bids the rivers rise,
And opens all the flood-gates of the skies:
The impetuous torrents from their hills obey,
Whole fields are drownâd, and mountains swept away;
Loud roars the deluge till it meets the main;
And trembling man sees all his labours vain!

And now the chief (the foremost troops repellâd)
Back to the ships his destined progress held,
Bore down half Troy in his resistless way,
And forced the routed ranks to stand the day.
Between the space where silver Simois flows,
Where lay the fleets, and where the rampires rose,
All grim in dust and blood Patroclus stands,
And turns the slaughter on the conquering bands.
First Pronous died beneath his fiery dart,
Which pierced below the shield his valiant heart.
Thestor was next, who saw the chief appear,
And fell the victim of his coward fear;
Shrunk up he sat, with wild and haggard eye,
Nor stood to combat, nor had force to fly;
Patroclus markâd him as he shunnâd the war,
And with unmanly tremblings shook the car,
And droppâd the flowing reins. Him âtwixt the jaws,
The javelin sticks, and from the chariot draws.
As on a rock that overhangs the main,
An angler, studious of the line and cane,
Some mighty fish draws panting to the shore:
Not with less ease the barbed javelin bore
The gaping dastard; as the spear was shook,
He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook.

Next on Eryalus he flies; a stone,
Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown:
Full on his crown the ponderous fragment flew,
And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two:
Prone to the ground the breathless warrior fell,
And death involved him with the shades of hell.
Then low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie;
Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die;
Amphoterus and Erymas succeed;
And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.
Whereâer he moves, the growing slaughters spread
In heaps on heaps a monument of dead.

When now Sarpedon his brave friends beheld
Grovelling in dust, and gasping on the field,
With this reproach his flying host he warms:
âOh stain to honour! oh disgrace to arms!
Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain;
This hand unaided shall the war sustain:
The task be mine this heroâs strength to try,
Who mows whole troops, and makes an army fly.â

He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car:
Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the war.
As when two vultures on the mountainâs height
Stoop with resounding pinions to the fight;
They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming cry;
The desert echoes, and the rocks reply:
The warriors thus opposed in arms, engage
With equal clamours, and with equal rage.

Jove viewâd the combat: whose event foreseen,
He thus bespoke his sister and his queen:
âThe hour draws on; the destinies ordain,[245]
My godlike son shall press the Phrygian plain:
Already on the verge of death he stands,
His life is owed to fierce Patroclusâ hands,
What passions in a parentâs breast debate!
Say, shall I snatch him from impending fate,
And send him safe to Lycia, distant far
From all the dangers and the toils of war;
Or to his doom my bravest offspring yield,
And fatten, with celestial blood, the field?â

Then thus the goddess with the radiant eyes:
âWhat words are these, O sovereign of the skies!
Short is the date prescribed to mortal man;
Shall Jove for one extend the narrow span,
Whose bounds were fixâd before his race began?
How many sons of gods, foredoomâd to death,
Before proud Ilion must resign their breath!
Were thine exempt, debate would rise above,
And murmuring powers condemn their partial Jove.
Give the bold chief a glorious fate in fight;
And when the ascending soul has wingâd her flight,
Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy command,
The breathless body to his native land.
His friends and people, to his future praise,
A marble tomb and pyramid shall raise,
And lasting honours to his ashes give;
His fame (âtis all the dead can have) shall live.â

She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome,
Assents to fate, and ratifies the doom.
Then touchâd with grief, the weeping heavens distillâd
A shower of blood oâer all the fatal field:
The god, his eyes averting from the plain,
Laments his son, predestined to be slain,
Far from the Lycian shores, his happy native reign.
Now met in arms, the combatants appear;
Each heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear;
From strong Patroclusâ hand the javelin fled,
And passâd the groin of valiant Thrasymed;
The nerves unbraced no more his bulk sustain,
He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain.
Two sounding darts the Lycian leader threw:
The first aloof with erring fury flew,
The next transpierced Achillesâ mortal steed,
The generous Pedasus of Theban breed:
Fixâd in the shoulderâs joint, he reelâd around,
Rollâd in the bloody dust, and pawâd the slippery ground.
His sudden fall the entangled harness broke;
Each axle crackled, and the chariot shook:
When bold Automedon, to disengage
The starting coursers, and restrain their rage,
Divides the traces with his sword, and freed
The encumbered chariot from the dying steed:
The rest move on, obedient to the rein:
The car rolls slowly oâer the dusty plain.

The towering chiefs to fiercer fight advance:
And first Sarpedon whirlâd his weighty lance,
Which oâer the warriorâs shoulder took its course,
And spent in empty air its dying force.
Not so Patroclusâ never-erring dart;
Aimâd at his breast it pierced a mortal part,
Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart.
Then as the mountain oak, or poplar tall,
Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral)
Nods to the axe, till with a groaning sound
It sinks, and spreads its honours on the ground,
Thus fell the king; and laid on earth supine,
Before his chariot stretchâd his form divine:
He graspâd the dust distainâd with streaming gore,
And, pale in death, lay groaning on the shore.
So lies a bull beneath the lionâs paws,
While the grim savage grinds with foamy jaws
The trembling limbs, and sucks the smoking blood;
Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the wood.

Then to the leader of the Lycian band
The dying chief addressâd his last command;
âGlaucus, be bold; thy task be first to dare
The glorious dangers of destructive war,
To lead my troops, to combat at their head,
Incite the living, and supply the dead.
Tell them, I charged them with my latest breath
Not unrevenged to bear Sarpedonâs death.
What grief, what shame, must Glaucus undergo,
If these spoilâd arms adorn a Grecian foe!
Then as a friend, and as a warrior fight;
Defend my body, conquer in my right:
That, taught by great examples, all may try
Like thee to vanquish, or like me to die.â
He ceased; the Fates suppressâd his labouring breath,
And his eyes darkenâd with the shades of death.
The insulting victor with disdain bestrode
The prostrate prince, and on his bosom trod;
Then drew the weapon from his panting heart,
The reeking fibres clinging to the dart;
From the wide wound gushâd out a stream of blood,
And the soul issued in the purple flood.
His flying steeds the Myrmidons detain,
Unguided now, their mighty master slain.
All-impotent of aid, transfixâd with grief,
Unhappy Glaucus heard the dying chief:
His painful arm, yet useless with the smart
Inflicted late by Teucerâs deadly dart,
Supported on his better hand he stayâd:
To PhÅbus then (âtwas all he could) he prayâd:

âAll-seeing monarch! whether Lyciaâs coast,
Or sacred Ilion, thy bright presence boast,
Powerful alike to ease the wretchâs smart;
O hear me! god of every healing art!
Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain,
That thrills my arm, and shoots through every vein,
I stand unable to sustain the spear,
And sigh, at distance from the glorious war.
Low in the dust is great Sarpedon laid,
Nor Jove vouchsafed his hapless offspring aid;
But thou, O god of health! thy succour lend,
To guard the relics of my slaughterâd friend:
For thou, though distant, canst restore my might,
To head my Lycians, and support the fight.â

Apollo heard; and, suppliant as he stood,
His heavenly hand restrainâd the flux of blood;
He drew the dolours from the wounded part,
And breathed a spirit in his rising heart.
Renewâd by art divine, the hero stands,
And owns the assistance of immortal hands.
First to the fight his native troops he warms,
Then loudly calls on Troyâs vindictive arms;
With ample strides he stalks from place to place;
Now fires Agenor, now Polydamas:
Ãneas next, and Hector he accosts;
Inflaming thus the rage of all their hosts.

âWhat thoughts, regardless chief! thy breast employ?
Oh too forgetful of the friends of Troy!
Those generous friends, who, from their country far,
Breathe their brave souls out in anotherâs war.
See! where in dust the great Sarpedon lies,
In action valiant, and in council wise,
Who guarded right, and kept his people free;
To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee!
Stretchâd by Patroclusâ arm on yonder plains,
O save from hostile rage his loved remains!
Ah let not Greece his conquerâd trophies boast,
Nor on his corse revenge her heroes lost!â

He spoke: each leader in his grief partook:
Troy, at the loss, through all her legions shook.
Transfixâd with deep regret, they view oâerthrown
At once his countryâs pillar, and their own;
A chief, who led to Troyâs beleaguerâd wall
A host of heroes, and outshined them all.
Fired, they rush on; first Hector seeks the foes,
And with superior vengeance greatly glows.

But oâer the dead the fierce Patroclus stands,
And rousing Ajax, roused the listening bands:

âHeroes, be men; be what you were before;
Or weigh the great occasion, and be more.
The chief who taught our lofty walls to yield,
Lies pale in death, extended on the field.
To guard his body Troy in numbers flies;
âTis half the glory to maintain our prize.
Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread,
And send the living Lycians to the dead.â

The heroes kindle at his fierce command;
The martial squadrons close on either hand:
Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms,
Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.
With horrid shouts they circle round the slain;
The clash of armour rings oâer all the plain.
Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight,
Oâer the fierce armies pours pernicious night,
And round his son confounds the warring hosts,
His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts.

Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;
Agacleusâ son, from Budiumâs lofty walls;
Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came
To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame;
Now sent to Troy, Achillesâ arms to aid,
He pays due vengeance to his kinsmanâs shade.
Soon as his luckless hand had touchâd the dead,
A rockâs large fragment thunderâd on his head;
Hurlâd by Hectorean force it cleft in twain
His shatterâd helm, and stretchâd him oâer the slain.

Fierce to the van of fight Patroclus came,
And, like an eagle darting at his game,
Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian band.
What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand,
O generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown,
At Sthenelaus flew the weighty stone,
Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near
That arm, drew back; and Hector learnâd to fear.
Far as an able hand a lance can throw,
Or at the lists, or at the fighting foe;
So far the Trojans from their lines retired;
Till Glaucus, turning, all the rest inspired.
Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage,
The only hope of Chalconâs trembling age;
Wide oâer the land was stretchâd his large domain,
With stately seats, and riches blest in vain:
Him, bold with youth, and eager to pursue
The flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew;
Pierced through the bosom with a sudden wound,
He fell, and falling made the fields resound.
The Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain;
With conquering shouts the Trojans shake the plain,
And crowd to spoil the dead: the Greeks oppose;
An iron circle round the carcase grows.

Then brave Laogonus resignâd his breath,
Despatchâd by Merion to the shades of death:
On Idaâs holy hill he made abode,
The priest of Jove, and honourâd like his god.
Between the jaw and ear the javelin went;
The soul, exhaling, issued at the vent.
His spear Ãneas at the victor threw,
Who stooping forward from the death withdrew;
The lance hissâd harmless oâer his covering shield,
And trembling struck, and rooted in the field;
There yet scarce spent, it quivers on the plain,
Sent by the great Ãneasâ arm in vain.
âSwift as thou art (the raging hero cries)
And skillâd in dancing to dispute the prize,
My spear, the destined passage had it found,
Had fixâd thy active vigour to the ground.â

âO valiant leader of the Dardan host!
(Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast)
Strong as you are, âtis mortal force you trust,
An arm as strong may stretch thee in the dust.
And if to this my lance thy fate be given,
Vain are thy vaunts; success is still from heaven:
This, instant, sends thee down to Plutoâs coast;
Mine is the glory, his thy parting ghost.â

âO friend (Menoetiusâ son this answer gave)
With words to combat, ill befits the brave;
Not empty boasts the sons of Troy repel,
Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell.
To speak, beseems the council; but to dare
In glorious action, is the task of war.â

This said, Patroclus to the battle flies;
Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise:
Shields, helmets rattle, as the warriors close;
And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows.
As through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground,
The labours of the woodmanâs axe resound;
Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide,
While crackling forests fall on every side:
Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms,
So fell the warriors, and so rung their arms.

Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore,
His heavenly form defaced with dust and gore,
And stuck with darts by warring heroes shed,
Lies undistinguishâd from the vulgar dead.
His long-disputed corse the chiefs enclose,
On every side the busy combat grows;
Thick as beneath some shepherdâs thatchâd abode
(The pails high foaming with a milky flood)
The buzzing flies, a persevering train,
Incessant swarm, and chased return again.

Jove viewâd the combat with a stern survey,
And eyes that flashâd intolerable day.
Fixâd on the field his sight, his breast debates
The vengeance due, and meditates the fates:
Whether to urge their prompt effect, and call
The force of Hector to Patroclusâ fall,
This instant see his short-lived trophies won,
And stretch him breathless on his slaughterâd son;
Or yet, with many a soulâs untimely flight,
Augment the fame and horror of the fight.
To crown Achillesâ valiant friend with praise
At length he dooms; and, that his last of days
Shall set in glory, bids him drive the foe;
Nor unattended see the shades below.
Then Hectorâs mind he fills with dire dismay;
He mounts his car, and calls his hosts away;
Sunk with Troyâs heavy fates, he sees decline
The scales of Jove, and pants with awe divine.

Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled,
And left their monarch with the common dead:
Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful wall
Of carnage rises, as the heroes fall.
(So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtain
The prize contested, and despoil the slain.
The radiant arms are by Patroclus borne;
Patroclusâ ships the glorious spoils adorn.

Then thus to PhÅbus, in the realms above,
Spoke from his throne the cloud-compelling Jove:
âDescend, my PhÅbus! on the Phrygian plain,
And from the fight convey Sarpedon slain;
Then bathe his body in the crystal flood,
With dust dishonourâd, and deformâd with blood;
Oâer all his limbs ambrosial odours shed,
And with celestial robes adorn the dead.
Those rites discharged, his sacred corse bequeath
To the soft arms of silent Sleep and Death.
They to his friends the immortal charge shall bear;
His friends a tomb and pyramid shall rear:
What honour mortals after death receive,
Those unavailing honours we may give!â


[Illustration: ] SLEEP AND DEATH CONVEYING THE BODY OF SARPEDON TO
LYCIA


Apollo bows, and from mount Idaâs height,
Swift to the field precipitates his flight;
Thence from the war the breathless hero bore,
Veilâd in a cloud, to silver Simoisâ shore;
There bathed his honourable wounds, and dressâd
His manly members in the immortal vest;
And with perfumes of sweet ambrosial dews
Restores his freshness, and his form renews.
Then Sleep and Death, two twins of winged race,
Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace,
Received Sarpedon, at the godâs command,
And in a moment reachâd the Lycian land;
The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid,
Where endless honours wait the sacred shade.

Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains,
With foaming coursers, and with loosenâd reins.
Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew,
Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew:
Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain,
Vain was thy friendâs command, thy courage vain.
For he, the god, whose counsels uncontrollâd
Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold;
The god who gives, resumes, and orders all,
He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.

Who first, brave hero! by that arm was slain,
Who last beneath thy vengeance pressâd the plain;
When heaven itself thy fatal fury led,
And callâd to fill the number of the dead?
Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds;
Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds,
Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground;
The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crownâd:
Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night;
The rest, dispersing, trust their fates to flight.

Now Troy had stoopâd beneath his matchless power,
But flaming PhÅbus kept the sacred tower.
Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;[246]
His blazing aegis thrice Apollo shook;
He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the cloud,
A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

âPatroclus! cease; this heaven-defended wall
Defies thy lance; not fated yet to fall;
Thy friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand,
Troy shall not stoop even to Achillesâ hand.â

So spoke the god who darts celestial fires;
The Greek obeys him, and with awe retires.
While Hector, checking at the Scaean gates
His panting coursers, in his breast debates,
Or in the field his forces to employ,
Or draw the troops within the walls of Troy.
Thus while he thought, beside him PhÅbus stood,
In Asiusâ shape, who reigned by Sangarâs flood;
(Thy brother, Hecuba! from Dymas sprung,
A valiant warrior, haughty, bold, and young;)
Thus he accosts him. âWhat a shameful sight!
God! is it Hector that forbears the fight?
Were thine my vigour this successful spear
Should soon convince thee of so false a fear.
Turn thee, ah turn thee to the field of fame,
And in Patroclusâ blood efface thy shame.
Perhaps Apollo shall thy arms succeed,
And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed.â

So spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight,
And plunged amidst the tumult of the fight.
He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car;
The lash resounds, the coursers rush to war.
The god the Greciansâ sinking souls depressâd,
And pourâd swift spirits through each Trojan breast.
Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight;
A spear his left, a stone employs his right:
With all his nerves he drives it at the foe.
Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
The falling ruin crushâd Cebrionâs head,
The lawless offspring of king Priamâs bed;
His front, brows, eyes, one undistinguishâd wound:
The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground.
The charioteer, while yet he held the rein,
Struck from the car, falls headlong on the plain.
To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides,
While the proud victor thus his fall derides.

âGood heaven! what active feats yon artist shows!
What skilful divers are our Phrygian foes!
Mark with what ease they sink into the sand!
Pity that all their practice is by land!â

Then rushing sudden on his prostrate prize,
To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies:
Swift as a lion, terrible and bold,
That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold;
Pierced through the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain,
And from his fatal courage finds his bane.
At once bold Hector leaping from his car,
Defends the body, and provokes the war.
Thus for some slaughterâd hind, with equal rage,
Two lordly rulers of the wood engage;
Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades,
And echoing roars rebellow through the shades.
Stern Hector fastens on the warriorâs head,
And by the foot Patroclus drags the dead:
While all around, confusion, rage, and fright,
Mix the contending hosts in mortal fight.
So pent by hills, the wild winds roar aloud
In the deep bosom of some gloomy wood;
Leaves, arms, and trees, aloft in air are blown,
The broad oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan;
This way and that, the rattling thicket bends,
And the whole forest in one crash descends.
Not with less noise, with less tumultuous rage,
In dreadful shock the mingled hosts engage.
Darts showerâd on darts, now round the carcase ring;
Now flights of arrows bounding from the string:
Stones follow stones; some clatter on the fields,
Some hard, and heavy, shake the sounding shields.
But where the rising whirlwind clouds the plains,
Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief remains,
And, stretchâd in death, forgets the guiding reins!

Now flaming from the zenith, Sol had driven
His fervid orb through half the vault of heaven;
While on each host with equal tempests fell
The showering darts, and numbers sank to hell.
But when his evening wheels oâerhung the main,
Glad conquest rested on the Grecian train.
Then from amidst the tumult and alarms,
They draw the conquerâd corse and radiant arms.
Then rash Patroclus with new fury glows,
And breathing slaughter, pours amid the foes.
Thrice on the press like Mars himself he flew,
And thrice three heroes at each onset slew.
There ends thy glory! there the Fates untwine
The last, black remnant of so bright a line:
Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way;
Death calls, and heaven allows no longer day!

For lo! the god in dusky clouds enshrined,
Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.
The weighty shock his neck and shoulders feel;
His eyes flash sparkles, his stunnâd senses reel
In giddy darkness; far to distance flung,
His bounding helmet on the champaign rung.
Achillesâ plume is stainâd with dust and gore;
That plume which never stoopâd to earth before;
Long used, untouchâd, in fighting fields to shine,
And shade the temples of the mad divine.
Jove dooms it now on Hectorâs helm to nod;
Not longâfor fate pursues him, and the god.

His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield
Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field:
The corslet his astonishâd breast forsakes:
Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes;
Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:
Such is the force of more than mortal hands!

A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame,
From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name;
Famed for the manage of the foaming horse,
Skillâd in the dart, and matchless in the course:
Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car,
While yet he learnâd his rudiments of war.
His venturous spear first drew the heroâs gore;
He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.
Nor, though disarmâd, Patroclusâ fury stood:
But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.
And turnâd him short, and herded in the crowd.
Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear,
Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear,
Retires for succour to his social train,
And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.
Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views,
Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues:
The lance arrests him with a mortal wound;
He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all
Her yet-surviving heroes seemâd to fall.
So, scorchâd with heat, along the desert score,
The roaming lion meets a bristly boar,
Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood,
With flaming eyes, and jaws besmearâd with blood;
At length the sovereign savage wins the strife;
And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life.
Patroclus thus, so many chiefs oâerthrown,
So many lives effused, expires his own.
As dying now at Hectorâs feet he lies,
He sternly views him, and triumphant cries:

âLie there, Patroclus! and with thee, the joy
Thy pride once promised, of subverting Troy;
The fancied scenes of Ilion wrapt in flames,
And thy soft pleasures served with captive dames.
Unthinking man! I fought those towers to free,
And guard that beauteous race from lords like thee:
But thou a prey to vultures shalt be made;
Thy own Achilles cannot lend thee aid;
Though much at parting that great chief might say,
And much enjoin thee, this important day.

âReturn not, my brave friend (perhaps he said),
Without the bloody arms of Hector dead.â
He spoke, Patroclus marchâd, and thus he sped.â

Supine, and wildly gazing on the skies,
With faint, expiring breath, the chief replies:

âVain boaster! cease, and know the powers divine!
Joveâs and Apolloâs is this deed, not thine;
To heaven is owed whateâer your own you call,
And heaven itself disarmâd me ere my fall.
Had twenty mortals, each thy match in might,
Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight:
By fate and PhÅbus was I first oâerthrown,
Euphorbus next; the third mean part thy own.
But thou, imperious! hear my latest breath;
The gods inspire it, and it sounds thy death:
Insulting man, thou shalt be soon as I;
Black fate oâerhangs thee, and thy hour draws nigh;
Even now on lifeâs last verge I see thee stand,
I see thee fall, and by Achillesâ hand.â

He faints: the soul unwilling wings her way,
(The beauteous body left a load of clay)
Flits to the lone, uncomfortable coast;
A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

Then Hector pausing, as his eyes he fed
On the pale carcase, thus addressâd the dead:

âFrom whence this boding speech, the stern decree
Of death denounced, or why denounced to me?
Why not as well Achillesâ fate be given
To Hectorâs lance? Who knows the will of heaven?â

Pensive he said; then pressing as he lay
His breathless bosom, tore the lance away;
And upwards cast the corse: the reeking spear
He shakes, and charges the bold charioteer.
But swift Automedon with loosenâd reins
Rapt in the chariot oâer the distant plains,
Far from his rage the immortal coursers drove;
The immortal coursers were the gift of Jove.


[Illustration: ] ÃSCULAPIUS




BOOK XVII.


ARGUMENT.


THE SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.âTHE ACTS OF MENELAUS.


Menelaus, upon the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy:
Euphorbus, who attempts it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelaus
retires; but soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off. This, Glaucus
objects to Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts on the armour he had
won from Patroclus, and renews the battle. The Greeks give way, till
Ajax rallies them: Ãneas sustains the Trojans. Ãneas and Hector attempt
the chariot of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon. The horses of
Achilles deplore the loss of Patroclus: Jupiter covers his body with a
thick darkness: the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion. Menelaus
sends Antilochus to Achilles, with the news of Patroclusâ death: then
returns to the fight, where, though attacked with the utmost fury, he
and Meriones, assisted by the Ajaces, bear off the body to the ships.
    The time is the evening of the eight-and-twentieth day. The scene
    lies in the fields before Troy.


On the cold earth divine Patroclus spread,
Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead.
Great Menelaus, touchâd with generous woe,
Springs to the front, and guards him from the foe.
Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves,
Fruit of her throes, and first-born of her loves;
And anxious (helpless as he lies, and bare)
Turns, and re-turns her, with a motherâs care,
Opposed to each that near the carcase came,
His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame.

The son of Panthus, skillâd the dart to send,
Eyes the dead hero, and insults the friend.
âThis hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low;
Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow:
To me the spoils my prowess won, resign:
Depart with life, and leave the glory mine.â

The Trojan thus: the Spartan monarch burnâd
With generous anguish, and in scorn returnâd:
âLaughâst thou not, Jove! from thy superior throne,
When mortals boast of prowess not their own?
Not thus the lion glories in his might,
Nor panther braves his spotted foe in fight,
Nor thus the boar (those terrors of the plain;)
Man only vaunts his force, and vaunts in vain.
But far the vainest of the boastful kind,
These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind.
Yet âtwas but late, beneath my conquering steel
This boasterâs brother, Hyperenor, fell;
Against our arm which rashly he defied,
Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride.
These eyes beheld him on the dust expire,
No more to cheer his spouse, or glad his sire.
Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom,
Go, wait thy brother to the Stygian gloom;
Or, while thou mayâst, avoid the threatenâd fate;
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.â

Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: âThat action known,
Come, for my brotherâs blood repay thy own.
His weeping father claims thy destined head,
And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.
On these thy conquerâd spoils I shall bestow,
To soothe a consortâs and a parentâs woe.
No longer then defer the glorious strife,
Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life.â

Swift as the word the missile lance he flings;
The well-aimâd weapon on the buckler rings,
But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls.
On Jove the father great Atrides calls,
Nor flies the javelin from his arm in vain,
It pierced his throat, and bent him to the plain;
Wide through the neck appears the grisly wound,
Prone sinks the warrior, and his arms resound.
The shining circlets of his golden hair,
Which even the Graces might be proud to wear,
Instarrâd with gems and gold, bestrow the shore,
With dust dishonourâd, and deformâd with gore.

As the young olive, in some sylvan scene,
Crownâd by fresh fountains with eternal green,
Lifts the gay head, in snowy flowerets fair,
And plays and dances to the gentle air;
When lo! a whirlwind from high heaven invades
The tender plant, and withers all its shades;
It lies uprooted from its genial bed,
A lovely ruin now defaced and dead:
Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay,
While the fierce Spartan tore his arms away.
Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize,
Affrighted Troy the towering victor flies:
Flies, as before some mountain lionâs ire
The village curs and trembling swains retire,
When oâer the slaughterâd bull they hear him roar,
And see his jaws distil with smoking gore:
All pale with fear, at distance scatterâd round,
They shout incessant, and the vales resound.

Meanwhile Apollo viewâd with envious eyes,
And urged great Hector to dispute the prize;
(In Mentesâ shape, beneath whose martial care
The rough Ciconians learnâd the trade of war;)[247]
âForbear (he cried) with fruitless speed to chase
Achillesâ coursers, of ethereal race;
They stoop not, these, to mortal manâs command,
Or stoop to none but great Achillesâ hand.
Too long amused with a pursuit so vain,
Turn, and behold the brave Euphorbus slain;
By Sparta slain! for ever now suppressâd
The fire which burnâd in that undaunted breast!â

Thus having spoke, Apollo wingâd his flight,
And mixâd with mortals in the toils of fight:
His words infixâd unutterable care
Deep in great Hectorâs soul: through all the war
He darts his anxious eye; and, instant, viewâd
The breathless hero in his blood imbued,
(Forth welling from the wound, as prone he lay)
And in the victorâs hands the shining prey.
Sheathâd in bright arms, through cleaving ranks he flies,
And sends his voice in thunder to the skies:
Fierce as a flood of flame by Vulcan sent,
It flew, and fired the nations as it went.
Atrides from the voice the storm divined,
And thus explored his own unconquerâd mind:

âThen shall I quit Patroclus on the plain,
Slain in my cause, and for my honour slain!
Desert the arms, the relics, of my friend?
Or singly, Hector and his troops attend?
Sure where such partial favour heaven bestowâd,
To brave the hero were to brave the god:
Forgive me, Greece, if once I quit the field;
âTis not to Hector, but to heaven I yield.
Yet, nor the god, nor heaven, should give me fear,
Did but the voice of Ajax reach my ear:
Still would we turn, still battle on the plains,
And give Achilles all that yet remains
Of his and our Patroclusââ This, no more
The time allowâd: Troy thickenâd on the shore.
A sable scene! The terrors Hector led.
Slow he recedes, and sighing quits the dead.

So from the fold the unwilling lion parts,
Forced by loud clamours, and a storm of darts;
He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies,
With heart indignant and retorted eyes.
Now enterâd in the Spartan ranks, he turnâd
His manly breast, and with new fury burnâd;
Oâer all the black battalions sent his view,
And through the cloud the godlike Ajax knew;
Where labouring on the left the warrior stood,
All grim in arms, and coverâd oâer with blood;
There breathing courage, where the god of day
Had sunk each heart with terror and dismay.

To him the king: âOh Ajax, oh my friend!
Haste, and Patroclusâ loved remains defend:
The body to Achilles to restore
Demands our care; alas, we can no more!
For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies;
And Hector glories in the dazzling prize.â
He said, and touchâd his heart. The raging pair
Pierced the thick battle, and provoke the war.
Already had stern Hector seized his head,
And doomâd to Trojan gods the unhappy dead;
But soon as Ajax rearâd his tower-like shield,
Sprung to his car, and measured back the field,
His train to Troy the radiant armour bear,
To stand a trophy of his fame in war.

Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield displayâd)
Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade;
And now before, and now behind he stood:
Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood,
With many a step, the lioness surrounds
Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds;
Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers,
Dark oâer the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours.
Fast by his side the generous Spartan glows
With great revenge, and feeds his inward woes.

But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids,
On Hector frowning, thus his flight upbraids:

âWhere now in Hector shall we Hector find?
A manly form, without a manly mind.
Is this, O chief! a heroâs boasted fame?
How vain, without the merit, is the name!
Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employ
What other methods may preserve thy Troy:
âTis time to try if Ilionâs state can stand
By thee alone, nor ask a foreign hand:
Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stake
Their lives for you? those Lycians you forsake?
What from thy thankless arms can we expect?
Thy friend Sarpedon proves thy base neglect;
Say, shall our slaughterâd bodies guard your walls,
While unrevengâd the great Sarpedon falls?
Even where he died for Troy, you left him there,
A feast for dogs, and all the fowls of air.
On my command if any Lycian wait,
Hence let him march, and give up Troy to fate.
Did such a spirit as the gods impart
Impel one Trojan hand or Trojan heart,
(Such as should burn in every soul that draws
The sword for glory, and his countryâs cause)
Even yet our mutual arms we might employ,
And drag yon carcase to the walls of Troy.
Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain
Sarpedonâs arms and honourâd corse again!
Greece with Achillesâ friend should be repaid,
And thus due honours purchased to his shade.
But words are vainâLet Ajax once appear,
And Hector trembles and recedes with fear;
Thou darâst not meet the terrors of his eye;
And lo! already thou preparâst to fly.â

The Trojan chief with fixâd resentment eyed
The Lycian leader, and sedate replied:

âSay, is it just, my friend, that Hectorâs ear
From such a warrior such a speech should hear?
I deemâd thee once the wisest of thy kind,
But ill this insult suits a prudent mind.
I shun great Ajax? I desert my train?
âTis mine to prove the rash assertion vain;
I joy to mingle where the battle bleeds,
And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds.
But Joveâs high will is ever uncontrollâd,
The strong he withers, and confounds the bold;
Now crowns with fame the mighty man, and now
Strikes the fresh garland from the victorâs brow!
Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way,
And thou be witness, if I fear to-day;
If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread,
Or yet their hero dare defend the dead.â

Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries:
âYe Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies!
Be men, my friends, in action as in name,
And yet be mindful of your ancient fame.
Hector in proud Achillesâ arms shall shine,
Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine.â

He strode along the field, as thus he said:
(The sable plumage nodded oâer his head:)
Swift through the spacious plain he sent a look;
One instant saw, one instant overtook
The distant band, that on the sandy shore
The radiant spoils to sacred Ilion bore.
There his own mail unbraced the field bestrowâd;
His train to Troy conveyâd the massy load.
Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands;
The work and present of celestial hands;
By aged Peleus to Achilles given,
As first to Peleus by the court of heaven:
His fatherâs arms not long Achilles wears,
Forbid by fate to reach his fatherâs years.

Him, proud in triumph, glittering from afar,
The god whose thunder rends the troubled air
Beheld with pity; as apart he sat,
And, conscious, lookâd through all the scene of fate.
He shook the sacred honours of his head;
Olympus trembled, and the godhead said;
âAh, wretched man! unmindful of thy end!
A momentâs glory; and what fates attend!
In heavenly panoply divinely bright
Thou standâst, and armies tremble at thy sight,
As at Achillesâ self! beneath thy dart
Lies slain the great Achillesâ dearer part.
Thou from the mighty dead those arms hast torn,
Which once the greatest of mankind had worn.
Yet live! I give thee one illustrious day,
A blaze of glory ere thou fadâst away.
For ah! no more Andromache shall come
With joyful tears to welcome Hector home;
No more officious, with endearing charms,
From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelidesâ arms!â

Then with his sable brow he gave the nod
That seals his word; the sanction of the god.
The stubborn arms (by Joveâs command disposed)
Conformâd spontaneous, and around him closed:
Fillâd with the god, enlarged his members grew,
Through all his veins a sudden vigour flew,
The blood in brisker tides began to roll,
And Mars himself came rushing on his soul.
Exhorting loud through all the field he strode,
And lookâd, and moved, Achilles, or a god.
Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, he inspires,
Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires;
The great Thersilochus like fury found,
Asteropaeus kindled at the sound,
And Ennomus, in augury renownâd.

âHear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumberâd bands
Of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands!
âTwas not for state we summonâd you so far,
To boast our numbers, and the pomp of war:
Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase,
To save our present, and our future race.
For this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy,
And glean the relics of exhausted Troy.
Now then, to conquer or to die prepare;
To die or conquer are the terms of war.
Whatever hand shall win Patroclus slain,
Whoeâer shall drag him to the Trojan train,
With Hectorâs self shall equal honours claim;
With Hector part the spoil, and share the fame.â

Fired by his words, the troops dismiss their fears,
They join, they thicken, they protend their spears;
Full on the Greeks they drive in firm array,
And each from Ajax hopes the glorious prey:
Vain hope! what numbers shall the field oâerspread,
What victims perish round the mighty dead!

Great Ajax markâd the growing storm from far,
And thus bespoke his brother of the war:
âOur fatal day, alas! is come, my friend;
And all our wars and glories at an end!
âTis not this corse alone we guard in vain,
Condemnâd to vultures on the Trojan plain;
We too must yield: the same sad fate must fall
On thee, on me, perhaps, my friend, on all.
See what a tempest direful Hector spreads,
And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our heads!
Call on our Greeks, if any hear the call,
The bravest Greeks: this hour demands them all.â

The warrior raised his voice, and wide around
The field re-echoed the distressful sound.
âO chiefs! O princes, to whose hand is given
The rule of men; whose glory is from heaven!
Whom with due honours both Atrides grace:
Ye guides and guardians of our Argive race!
All, whom this well-known voice shall reach from far,
All, whom I see not through this cloud of war;
Come all! let generous rage your arms employ,
And save Patroclus from the dogs of Troy.â

Oilean Ajax first the voice obeyâd,
Swift was his pace, and ready was his aid:
Next him Idomeneus, more slow with age,
And Merion, burning with a heroâs rage.
The long-succeeding numbers who can name?
But all were Greeks, and eager all for fame.
Fierce to the charge great Hector led the throng;
Whole Troy embodied rushâd with shouts along.
Thus, when a mountain billow foams and raves,
Where some swoln river disembogues his waves,
Full in the mouth is stoppâd the rushing tide,
The boiling ocean works from side to side,
The river trembles to his utmost shore,
And distant rocks re-bellow to the roar.

Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian band
With brazen shields in horrid circle stand.
Jove, pouring darkness oâer the mingled fight,
Conceals the warriorsâ shining helms in night:
To him, the chief for whom the hosts contend
Had lived not hateful, for he lived a friend:
Dead he protects him with superior care.
Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air.


[Illustration: ] FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS


The first attack the Grecians scarce sustain,
Repulsed, they yield; the Trojans seize the slain.
Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on
By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon.
(Ajax to Peleusâ son the second name,
In graceful stature next, and next in fame.)
With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore;
So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar,
And rudely scatters, for a distance round,
The frighted hunter and the baying hound.
The son of Lethus, brave Pelasgusâ heir,
Hippothous, draggâd the carcase through the war;
The sinewy ankles bored, the feet he bound
With thongs inserted through the double wound:
Inevitable fate oâertakes the deed;
Doomâd by great Ajaxâ vengeful lance to bleed:
It cleft the helmetâs brazen cheeks in twain;
The shatterâd crest and horse-hair strow the plain:
With nerves relaxâd he tumbles to the ground:
The brain comes gushing through the ghastly wound:
He drops Patroclusâ foot, and oâer him spread,
Now lies a sad companion of the dead:
Far from Larissa lies, his native air,
And ill requites his parentsâ tender care.
Lamented youth! in lifeâs first bloom he fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

Once more at Ajax Hectorâs javelin flies;
The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies,
Shunnâd the descending death; which hissing on,
Stretchâd in the dust the great Iphytusâ son,
Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian kind
The boldest warrior and the noblest mind:
In little Panope, for strength renownâd,
He held his seat, and ruled the realms around.
Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood,
And deep transpiercing through the shoulder stood;
In clanging arms the hero fell and all
The fields resounded with his weighty fall.

Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends,
The Telamonian lance his belly rends;
The hollow armour burst before the stroke,
And through the wound the rushing entrails broke:
In strong convulsions panting on the sands
He lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands.

Struck at the sight, recede the Trojan train:
The shouting Argives strip the heroes slain.
And now had Troy, by Greece compellâd to yield,
Fled to her ramparts, and resignâd the field;
Greece, in her native fortitude elate,
With Jove averse, had turnâd the scale of fate:
But PhÅbus urged Ãneas to the fight;
He seemâd like aged Periphas to sight:
(A herald in Anchisesâ love grown old,
Revered for prudence, and with prudence bold.)

Thus heââWhat methods yet, O chief! remain,
To save your Troy, though heaven its fall ordain?
There have been heroes, who, by virtuous care,
By valour, numbers, and by arts of war,
Have forced the powers to spare a sinking state,
And gainâd at length the glorious odds of fate:
But you, when fortune smiles, when Jove declares
His partial favour, and assists your wars,
Your shameful efforts âgainst yourselves employ,
And force the unwilling god to ruin Troy.â

Ãneas through the form assumed descries
The power concealâd, and thus to Hector cries:
âOh lasting shame! to our own fears a prey,
We seek our ramparts, and desert the day.
A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms,
And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan arms.â

He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew:
The bold example all his hosts pursue.
Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled,
In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede;
Who viewâd his fall, and, grieving at the chance,
Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance;
The whirling lance, with vigorous force addressâd,
Descends, and pants in Apisaonâs breast;
From rich Paeoniaâs vales the warrior came,
Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and fame.
Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain,
And rushâd to combat, but he rushâd in vain:
Indissolubly firm, around the dead,
Rank within rank, on buckler buckler spread,
And hemmâd with bristled spears, the Grecians stood,
A brazen bulwark, and an iron wood.
Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care,
And in an orb contracts the crowded war,
Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall,
And stands the centre and the soul of all:
Fixâd on the spot they war, and wounded, wound;
A sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground:
On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the Trojans bled,
And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead.

Greece, in close order, and collected might,
Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering fight;
Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns,
And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
In one thick darkness all the fight was lost;
The sun, the moon, and all the ethereal host
Seemâd as extinct: day ravishâd from their eyes,
And all heavenâs splendours blotted from the skies.
Such oâer Patroclusâ body hung the night,
The rest in sunshine fought, and open light;
Unclouded there, the aerial azure spread,
No vapour rested on the mountainâs head,
The golden sun pourâd forth a stronger ray,
And all the broad expansion flamed with day.
Dispersed around the plain, by fits they fight,
And here and there their scatterâd arrows light:
But death and darkness oâer the carcase spread,
There burnâd the war, and there the mighty bled.

Meanwhile the sons of Nestor, in the rear,
(Their fellows routed,) toss the distant spear,
And skirmish wide: so Nestor gave command,
When from the ships he sent the Pylian band.
The youthful brothers thus for fame contend,
Nor knew the fortune of Achillesâ friend;
In thought they viewâd him still, with martial joy,
Glorious in arms, and dealing death to Troy.

But round the corse the heroes pant for breath,
And thick and heavy grows the work of death:
Oâerlabourâd now, with dust, and sweat, and gore,
Their knees, their legs, their feet, are covered oâer;
Drops follow drops, the clouds on clouds arise,
And carnage clogs their hands, and darkness fills their eyes.
As when a slaughterâd bullâs yet reeking hide,
Strainâd with full force, and tuggâd from side to side,
The brawny curriers stretch; and labour oâer
The extended surface, drunk with fat and gore:
So tugging round the corse both armies stood;
The mangled body bathed in sweat and blood;
While Greeks and Ilians equal strength employ,
Now to the ships to force it, now to Troy.
Not Pallasâ self, her breast when fury warms,
Nor he whose anger sets the world in arms,
Could blame this scene; such rage, such horror reignâd;
Such, Jove to honour the great dead ordainâd.

Achilles in his ships at distance lay,
Nor knew the fatal fortune of the day;
He, yet unconscious of Patroclusâ fall,
In dust extended under Ilionâs wall,
Expects him glorious from the conquered plain,
And for his wishâd return prepares in vain;
Though well he knew, to make proud Ilion bend
Was more than heaven had destined to his friend.
Perhaps to him: this Thetis had revealâd;
The rest, in pity to her son, concealâd.

Still raged the conflict round the hero dead,
And heaps on heaps by mutual wounds they bled.
âCursed be the man (even private Greeks would say)
Who dares desert this well-disputed day!
First may the cleaving earth before our eyes
Gape wide, and drink our blood for sacrifice;
First perish all, ere haughty Troy shall boast
We lost Patroclus, and our glory lost!â

Thus they: while with one voice the Trojans said,
âGrant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!â

Then clash their sounding arms; the clangours rise,
And shake the brazen concave of the skies.

Meantime, at distance from the scene of blood,
The pensive steeds of great Achilles stood:
Their godlike master slain before their eyes,
They wept, and shared in human miseries.[248]
In vain Automedon now shakes the rein,
Now plies the lash, and soothes and threats in vain;
Nor to the fight nor Hellespont they go,
Restive they stood, and obstinate in woe:
Still as a tombstone, never to be moved,
On some good man or woman unreproved
Lays its eternal weight; or fixâd, as stands
A marble courser by the sculptorâs hands,
Placed on the heroâs grave. Along their face
The big round drops coursed down with silent pace,
Conglobing on the dust. Their manes, that late
Circled their arched necks, and waved in state,
Trailâd on the dust beneath the yoke were spread,
And prone to earth was hung their languid head:
Nor Jove disdainâd to cast a pitying look,
While thus relenting to the steeds he spoke:

âUnhappy coursers of immortal strain,
Exempt from age, and deathless, now in vain;
Did we your race on mortal man bestow,
Only, alas! to share in mortal woe?
For ah! what is there of inferior birth,
That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth;
What wretched creature of what wretched kind,
Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
A miserable race! but cease to mourn:
For not by you shall Priamâs son be borne
High on the splendid car: one glorious prize
He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.
Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart,
Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
Automedon your rapid flight shall bear
Safe to the navy through the storm of war.
For yet âtis given to Troy to ravage oâer
The field, and spread her slaughters to the shore;
The sun shall see her conquer, till his fall
With sacred darkness shades the face of all.â

He said; and breathing in the immortal horse
Excessive spirit, urged them to the course;
From their high manes they shake the dust, and bear
The kindling chariot through the parted war:
So flies a vulture through the clamorous train
Of geese, that scream, and scatter round the plain.
From danger now with swiftest speed they flew,
And now to conquest with like speed pursue;
Sole in the seat the charioteer remains,
Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins:
Him brave Alcimedon beheld distressâd,
Approachâd the chariot, and the chief addressâd:

âWhat god provokes thee rashly thus to dare,
Alone, unaided, in the thickest war?
Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector wields
Achillesâ arms triumphant in the fields.â

âIn happy time (the charioteer replies)
The bold Alcimedon now greets my eyes;
No Greek like him the heavenly steeds restrains,
Or holds their fury in suspended reins:
Patroclus, while he lived, their rage could tame,
But now Patroclus is an empty name!
To thee I yield the seat, to thee resign
The ruling charge: the task of fight be mine.â

He said. Alcimedon, with active heat,
Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.
His friend descends. The chief of Troy descried,
And callâd Ãneas fighting near his side.

âLo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored,
Achillesâ car, deserted of its lord!
The glorious steeds our ready arms invite,
Scarce their weak drivers guide them through the fight.
Can such opponents stand when we assail?
Unite thy force, my friend, and we prevail.â

The son of Venus to the counsel yields;
Then oâer their backs they spread their solid shields:
With brass refulgent the broad surface shined,
And thick bull-hides the spacious concave lined.
Them Chromius follows, Aretus succeeds;
Each hopes the conquest of the lofty steeds:
In vain, brave youths, with glorious hopes ye burn,
In vain advance! not fated to return.

Unmovâd, Automedon attends the fight,
Implores the Eternal, and collects his might.
Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind:
âOh keep the foaming coursers close behind!
Full on my shoulders let their nostrils blow,
For hard the fight, determined is the foe;
âTis Hector comes: and when he seeks the prize,
War knows no mean; he wins it or he dies.â

Then through the field he sends his voice aloud,
And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd,
With great Atrides. âHither turn, (he said,)
Turn where distress demands immediate aid;
The dead, encircled by his friends, forego,
And save the living from a fiercer foe.
Unhelpâd we stand, unequal to engage
The force of Hector, and Ãneasâ rage:
Yet mighty as they are, my force to prove
Is only mine: the event belongs to Jove.â

He spoke, and high the sounding javelin flung,
Which passâd the shield of Aretus the young:
It pierced his belt, embossâd with curious art,
Then in the lower belly struck the dart.
As when a ponderous axe, descending full,
Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:[249]
Struck âtwixt the horns, he springs with many a bound,
Then tumbling rolls enormous on the ground:
Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received,
And the spear trembled as his entrails heaved.

Now at Automedon the Trojan foe
Discharged his lance; the meditated blow,
Stooping, he shunnâd; the javelin idly fled,
And hissâd innoxious oâer the heroâs head;
Deep rooted in the ground, the forceful spear
In long vibrations spent its fury there.
With clashing falchions now the chiefs had closed,
But each brave Ajax heard, and interposed;
Nor longer Hector with his Trojans stood,
But left their slain companion in his blood:
His arms Automedon divests, and cries,
âAccept, Patroclus, this mean sacrifice:
Thus have I soothed my griefs, and thus have paid,
Poor as it is, some offering to thy shade.â

So looks the lion oâer a mangled boar,
All grim with rage, and horrible with gore;
High on the chariot at one bound he sprung,
And oâer his seat the bloody trophies hung.

And now Minerva from the realms of air
Descends impetuous, and renews the war;
For, pleased at length the Grecian arms to aid,
The lord of thunders sent the blue-eyed maid.
As when high Jove denouncing future woe,
Oâer the dark clouds extends his purple bow,
(In sign of tempests from the troubled air,
Or from the rage of man, destructive war,)
The drooping cattle dread the impending skies,
And from his half-tillâd field the labourer flies:
In such a form the goddess round her drew
A livid cloud, and to the battle flew.
Assuming PhÅnixâ shape on earth she falls,
And in his well-known voice to Sparta calls:
âAnd lies Achillesâ friend, beloved by all,
A prey to dogs beneath the Trojan wall?
What shame 'o Greece for future times to tell,
To thee the greatest in whose cause he fell!â
âO chief, O father! (Atreusâ son replies)
O full of days! by long experience wise!
What more desires my soul, than here unmoved
To guard the body of the man I loved?
Ah, would Minerva send me strength to rear
This wearied arm, and ward the storm of war!
But Hector, like the rage of fire, we dread,
And Joveâs own glories blaze around his head!â

Pleased to be first of all the powers addressâd,
She breathes new vigour in her heroâs breast,
And fills with keen revenge, with fell despite,
Desire of blood, and rage, and lust of fight.
So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all oâer),
Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore;
(Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings
Untamed, untired, he turns, attacks, and stings.
Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew,
And sent his soul with every lance he threw.

There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame,
AÃ«tionâs son, and Podes was his name:
With riches honourâd, and with courage blessâd,
By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest;
Through his broad belt the spear a passage found,
And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.
Sudden at Hectorâs side Apollo stood,
Like Phaenops, Asiusâ son, appearâd the god;
(Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign
In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.)

âOh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!
What Grecian now shall tremble at thy name?
Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield,
A chief once thought no terror of the field?
Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize
He bears victorious, while our army flies:
By the same arm illustrious Podes bled;
The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!â
This heard, oâer Hector spreads a cloud of woe,
Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe.

But now the Eternal shook his sable shield,
That shaded Ide and all the subject field
Beneath its ample verge. A rolling cloud
Involved the mount; the thunder roarâd aloud;
The affrighted hills from their foundations nod,
And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god:
At one regard of his all-seeing eye
The vanquishâd triumph, and the victors fly.

Then trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led;
For as the brave BÅotian turnâd his head
To face the foe, Polydamas drew near,
And razed his shoulder with a shortenâd spear:
By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain,
Pierced through the wrist; and raging with the pain,
Grasps his once formidable lance in vain.

As Hector followâd, Idomen addressâd
The flaming javelin to his manly breast;
The brittle point before his corslet yields;
Exulting Troy with clamour fills the fields:
High on his chariots the Cretan stood,
The son of Priam whirlâd the massive wood.
But erring from its aim, the impetuous spear
Struck to the dust the squire and charioteer
Of martial Merion: Coeranus his name,
Who left fair Lyctus for the fields of fame.
On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low,
Had graced the triumphs of his Trojan foe,
But the brave squire the ready coursers brought,
And with his life his masterâs safety bought.
Between his cheek and ear the weapon went,
The teeth it shatterâd, and the tongue it rent.
Prone from the seat he tumbles to the plain;
His dying hand forgets the falling rein:
This Merion reaches, bending from the car,
And urges to desert the hopeless war:
Idomeneus consents; the lash applies;
And the swift chariot to the navy flies.

Not Ajax less the will of heaven descried,
And conquest shifting to the Trojan side,
Turnâd by the hand of Jove. Then thus begun,
To Atreusâs seed, the godlike Telamon:

âAlas! who sees not Joveâs almighty hand
Transfers the glory to the Trojan band?
Whether the weak or strong discharge the dart,
He guides each arrow to a Grecian heart:
Not so our spears; incessant though they rain,
He suffers every lance to fall in vain.
Deserted of the god, yet let us try
What human strength and prudence can supply;
If yet this honourâd corse, in triumph borne,
May glad the fleets that hope not our return,
Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their fates,
And still hear Hector thundering at their gates.
Some hero too must be despatchâd to bear
The mournful message to Pelidesâ ear;
For sure he knows not, distant on the shore,
His friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more.
But such a chief I spy not through the host:
The men, the steeds, the armies, all are lost
In general darknessâLord of earth and air!
Oh king! Oh father! hear my humble prayer:
Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore;
Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more:
If Greece must perish, we thy will obey,
But let us perish in the face of day!â

With tears the hero spoke, and at his prayer
The god relenting clearâd the clouded air;
Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray;
The blaze of armour flashâd against the day.
âNow, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight;
If yet Antilochus survives the fight,
Let him to great Achillesâ ear convey
The fatal newsââAtrides hastes away.

So turns the lion from the nightly fold,
Though high in courage, and with hunger bold,
Long gallâd by herdsmen, and long vexâd by hounds,
Stiff with fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds;
The darts fly round him from a hundred hands,
And the red terrors of the blazing brands:
Till late, reluctant, at the dawn of day
Sour he departs, and quits the untasted prey,
So moved Atrides from his dangerous place
With weary limbs, but with unwilling pace;
The foe, he fearâd, might yet Patroclus gain,
And much admonishâd, much adjured his train:

âO guard these relics to your charge consignâd,
And bear the merits of the dead in mind;
How skillâd he was in each obliging art;
The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart:
He was, alas! but fate decreed his end,
In death a hero, as in life a friend!â

So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew,
And round on all sides sent his piercing view.
As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye
Of all that wings the mid aÃ«rial sky,
The sacred eagle, from his walks above
Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move;
Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare,
Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.
Not with less quickness, his exerted sight
Passâd this and that way, through the ranks of fight:
Till on the left the chief he sought, he found,
Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around:

To him the king: âBeloved of Jove! draw near,
For sadder tidings never touchâd thy ear;
Thy eyes have witnessâd what a fatal turn!
How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn.
This is not all: Patroclus, on the shore
Now pale and dead, shall succour Greece no more.
Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and tell
The sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell:
He too may haste the naked corse to gain:
The arms are Hectorâs, who despoilâd the slain.â

The youthful warrior heard with silent woe,
From his fair eyes the tears began to flow:
Big with the mighty grief, he strove to say
What sorrow dictates, but no word found way.
To brave Laodocus his arms he flung,
Who, near him wheeling, drove his steeds along;
Then ran the mournful message to impart,
With tearful eyes, and with dejected heart.

Swift fled the youth: nor Menelaus stands
(Though sore distressâd) to aid the Pylian bands;
But bids bold Thrasymede those troops sustain;
Himself returns to his Patroclus slain.
âGone is Antilochus (the hero said);
But hope not, warriors, for Achillesâ aid:
Though fierce his rage, unbounded be his woe,
Unarmâd, he fights not with the Trojan foe.
âTis in our hands alone our hopes remain,
âTis our own vigour must the dead regain,
And save ourselves, while with impetuous hate
Troy pours along, and this way rolls our fate.â

ââTis well (said Ajax), be it then thy care,
With Merionâs aid, the weighty corse to rear;
Myself, and my bold brother will sustain
The shock of Hector and his charging train:
Nor fear we armies, fighting side by side;
What Troy can dare, we have already tried,
Have tried it, and have stood.â The hero said.
High from the ground the warriors heave the dead.
A general clamour rises at the sight:
Loud shout the Trojans, and renew the fight.
Not fiercer rush along the gloomy wood,
With rage insatiate, and with thirst of blood,
Voracious hounds, that many a length before
Their furious hunters, drive the wounded boar;
But if the savage turns his glaring eye,
They howl aloof, and round the forest fly.
Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour,
Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower:
But Ajax turning, to their fears they yield,
All pale they tremble and forsake the field.

While thus aloft the heroâs corse they bear,
Behind them rages all the storm of war:
Confusion, tumult, horror, oâer the throng
Of men, steeds, chariots, urged the rout along:
Less fierce the winds with rising flames conspire
To whelm some city under waves of fire;
Now sink in gloomy clouds the proud abodes,
Now crack the blazing temples of the gods;
The rumbling torrent through the ruin rolls,
And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the poles.
The heroes sweat beneath their honourâd load:
As when two mules, along the rugged road,
From the steep mountain with exerted strength
Drag some vast beam, or mastâs unwieldy length;
Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil,
The enormous timber lumbering down the hill:
So theseâBehind, the bulk of Ajax stands,
And breaks the torrent of the rushing bands.
Thus when a river swellâd with sudden rains
Spreads his broad waters oâer the level plains,
Some interposing hill the stream divides,
And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides.
Still close they follow, close the rear engage;
Ãneas storms, and Hector foams with rage:
While Greece a heavy, thick retreat maintains,
Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes,
That shriek incessant, while the falcon, hung
High on poised pinions, threats their callow young.
So from the Trojan chiefs the Grecians fly,
Such the wild terror, and the mingled cry:
Within, without the trench, and all the way,
Strowâd in bright heaps, their arms and armour lay;
Such horror Jove impressâd! yet still proceeds
The work of death, and still the battle bleeds.


[Illustration: ] VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM




BOOK XVIII.


ARGUMENT.


THE GRIEF OF ACHILLES, AND NEW ARMOUR MADE HIM BY VULCAN.


The news of the death of Patroclus is brought to Achilles by
Antilochus. Thetis, hearing his lamentations, comes with all her sea-
nymphs to comfort him. The speeches of the mother and son on this
occasion. Iris appears to Achilles by the command of Juno, and orders
him to show himself at the head of the intrenchments. The sight of him
turns the fortunes of the day, and the body of Patroclus is carried off
by the Greeks. The Trojans call a council, where Hector and Polydamas
disagree in their opinions: but the advice of the former prevails, to
remain encamped in the field. The grief of Achilles over the body of
Patroclus.
    Thetis goes to the palace of Vulcan to obtain new arms for her son.
    The description of the wonderful works of Vulcan: and, lastly, that
    noble one of the shield of Achilles.
    The latter part of the nine-and-twentieth day, and the night
    ensuing, take up this book: the scene is at Achillesâ tent on the
    sea-shore, from whence it changes to the palace of Vulcan.


Thus like the rage of fire the combat burns,[250]
And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
Meanwhile, where Hellespontâs broad waters flow,
Stood Nestorâs son, the messenger of woe:
There sat Achilles, shaded by his sails,
On hoisted yards extended to the gales;
Pensive he sat; for all that fate designâd
Rose in sad prospect to his boding mind.
Thus to his soul he said: âAh! what constrains
The Greeks, late victors, now to quit the plains?
Is this the day, which heaven so long ago
Ordainâd, to sink me with the weight of woe?
(So Thetis warnâd;) when by a Trojan hand
The bravest of the Myrmidonian band
Should lose the light! Fulfilled is that decree;
Fallen is the warrior, and Patroclus he!
In vain I charged him soon to quit the plain,
And warnâd to shun Hectorean force in vain!â

Thus while he thinks, Antilochus appears,
And tells the melancholy tale with tears.
âSad tidings, son of Peleus! thou must hear;
And wretched I, the unwilling messenger!
Dead is Patroclus! For his corse they fight;
His naked corse: his arms are Hectorâs right.â

A sudden horror shot through all the chief,
And wrappâd his senses in the cloud of grief;
Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread
The scorching ashes oâer his graceful head;
His purple garments, and his golden hairs,
Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears;
On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw,
And rollâd and grovellâd, as to earth he grew.
The virgin captives, with disorderâd charms,
(Won by his own, or by Patroclusâ arms,)
Rushâd from their tents with cries; and gathering round,
Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the ground:
While Nestorâs son sustains a manlier part,
And mourns the warrior with a warriorâs heart;
Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe,
And oft prevents the meditated blow.

Far in the deep abysses of the main,[251]
With hoary Nereus, and the watery train,
The mother-goddess from her crystal throne
Heard his loud cries, and answerâd groan for groan.
The circling Nereids with their mistress weep,
And all the sea-green sisters of the deep.
Thalia, Glauce (every watery name),
Nesaea mild, and silver Spio came:
Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,
And the blue languish of soft Aliaâs eye.
Their locks Actaea and Limnoria rear,
Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear,
Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita;
Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay:
Next Callianira, Callianassa show
Their sister looks; Dexamene the slow,
And swift Dynamene, now cut the tides:
Iaera now the verdant wave divides:
Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the head,
Bright Galatea quits her pearly bed;
These Orythia, Clymene, attend,
Maera, Amphinome, the train extend;
And black Janira, and Janassa fair,
And Amatheia with her amber hair.
All these, and all that deep in ocean held
Their sacred seats, the glimmering grotto fillâd;
Each beat her ivory breast with silent woe,
Till Thetisâ sorrows thus began to flow:

âHear me, and judge, ye sisters of the main!
How just a cause has Thetis to complain!
How wretched, were I mortal, were my fate!
How more than wretched in the immortal state!
Sprung from my bed a godlike hero came,
The bravest far that ever bore the name;
Like some fair olive, by my careful hand
He grew, he flourishâd and adornâd the land!
To Troy I sent him: but the fates ordain
He never, never must return again.
So short a space the light of heaven to view,
So short, alas! and fillâd with anguish too!
Hear how his sorrows echo through the shore!
I cannot ease them, but I must deplore;
I go at least to bear a tender part,
And mourn my loved-one with a motherâs heart.â

She said, and left the caverns of the main,
All bathed in tears; the melancholy train
Attend her way. Wide-opening part the tides,
While the long pomp the silver wave divides.
Approaching now, they touchâd the Trojan land;
Then, two by two, ascended up the strand.
The immortal mother, standing close beside
Her mournful offspring, to his sighs replied;
Along the coast their mingled clamours ran,
And thus the silver-footed dame began:

âWhy mourns my son? thy late preferrâd request
The god has granted, and the Greeks distressâd:
Why mourns my son? thy anguish let me share,
Reveal the cause, and trust a parentâs care.â

He, deeply groaningââTo this cureless grief,
Not even the Thundererâs favour brings relief.
PatroclusâAh!âsay, goddess, can I boast
A pleasure now? revenge itself is lost;
Patroclus, loved of all my martial train,
Beyond mankind, beyond myself is slain!
Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestowâd
On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious load.
Cursed be that day, when all the powers above
Thy charms submitted to a mortal love:
O hadst thou still, a sister of the main,
Pursued the pleasures of the watery reign:
And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led
A mortal beauty to his equal bed!
Ere the sad fruit of thy unhappy womb
Had caused such sorrows past, and woes to come.
For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain,
New woes, new sorrows, shall create again.
âTis not in fate the alternate now to give;
Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.
Let me revenge it on proud Hectorâs heart,
Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart;
On these conditions will I breathe: till then,
I blush to walk among the race of men.â

A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed:
âAh then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!
When Hector falls, thou diest.âââLet Hector die,
And let me fall! (Achilles made reply)
Far lies Patroclus from his native plain!
He fell, and falling, wishâd my aid in vain.
Ah then, since from this miserable day
I cast all hope of my return away;
Since, unrevenged, a hundred ghosts demand
The fate of Hector from Achillesâ hand;
Since here, for brutal courage far renownâd,
I live an idle burden to the ground,
(Others in council famed for nobler skill,
More useful to preserve, than I to kill,)
Let meâBut oh! ye gracious powers above!
Wrath and revenge from men and gods remove:
Far, far too dear to every mortal breast,
Sweet to the soul, as honey to the taste:
Gathering like vapours of a noxious kind
From fiery blood, and darkening all the mind.
Me Agamemnon urged to deadly hate;
âTis pastâI quell it; I resign to fate.
YesâI will meet the murderer of my friend;
Or (if the gods ordain it) meet my end.
The stroke of fate the strongest cannot shun:
The great Alcides, Joveâs unequallâd son,
To Junoâs hate, at length resignâd his breath,
And sunk the victim of all-conquering death.
So shall Achilles fall! stretchâd pale and dead,
No more the Grecian hope, or Trojan dread!
Let me, this instant, rush into the fields,
And reap what glory lifeâs short harvest yields.
Shall I not force some widowâd dame to tear
With frantic hands her long dishevellâd hair?
Shall I not force her breast to heave with sighs,
And the soft tears to trickle from her eyes?
Yes, I shall give the fair those mournful charmsâ
In vain you hold meâHence! my arms! my arms!â
Soon shall the sanguine torrent spread so wide,
That all shall know Achilles swells the tide.â

âMy son (coerulean Thetis made reply,
To fate submitting with a secret sigh,)
The host to succour, and thy friends to save,
Is worthy thee; the duty of the brave.
But canst thou, naked, issue to the plains?
Thy radiant arms the Trojan foe detains.
Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high,
But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
Yet, yet awhile thy generous ardour stay;
Assured, I meet thee at the dawn of day,
Charged with refulgent arms (a glorious load),
Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god.â

Then turning to the daughters of the main,
The goddess thus dismissâd her azure train:

âYe sister Nereids! to your deeps descend;
Haste, and our fatherâs sacred seat attend;
I go to find the architect divine,
Where vast Olympusâ starry summits shine:
So tell our hoary sireââThis charge she gave:
The sea-green sisters plunge beneath the wave:
Thetis once more ascends the blessâd abodes,
And treads the brazen threshold of the gods.


[Illustration: ] THETIS ORDERING THE NEREIDS TO DESCEND INTO THE SEA


And now the Greeks from furious Hectorâs force,
Urge to broad Hellespont their headlong course;
Nor yet their chiefs Patroclusâ body bore
Safe through the tempest to the tented shore.
The horse, the foot, with equal fury joinâd,
Pourâd on the rear, and thunderâd close behind:
And like a flame through fields of ripenâd corn,
The rage of Hector oâer the ranks was borne.
Thrice the slain hero by the foot he drew;
Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew:
As oft the Ajaces his assault sustain;
But checkâd, he turns; repulsâd, attacks again.
With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires,
Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires:
So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain,
The hungry lion from a carcase slain.
Even yet Patroclus had he borne away,
And all the glories of the extended day,
Had not high Juno from the realms of air,
Secret, despatchâd her trusty messenger.
The various goddess of the showery bow,
Shot in a whirlwind to the shore below;
To great Achilles at his ships she came,
And thus began the many-colourâd dame:

âRise, son of Peleus! rise, divinely brave!
Assist the combat, and Patroclus save:
For him the slaughter to the fleet they spread,
And fall by mutual wounds around the dead.
To drag him back to Troy the foe contends:
Nor with his death the rage of Hector ends:
A prey to dogs he dooms the corse to lie,
And marks the place to fix his head on high.
Rise, and prevent (if yet you think of fame)
Thy friendâs disgrace, thy own eternal shame!â

âWho sends thee, goddess, from the ethereal skies?â
Achilles thus. And Iris thus replies:

âI come, Pelides! from the queen of Jove,
The immortal empress of the realms above;
Unknown to him who sits remote on high,
Unknown to all the synod of the sky.â
âThou comest in vain (he cries, with fury warmâd);
Arms I have none, and can I fight unarmâd?
Unwilling as I am, of force I stay,
Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of day
Vulcanian arms: what other can I wield,
Except the mighty Telamonian shield?
That, in my friendâs defence, has Ajax spread,
While his strong lance around him heaps the dead:
The gallant chief defends Menoetiusâ son,
And does what his Achilles should have done.â

âThy want of arms (said Iris) well we know;
But though unarmâd, yet clad in terrors, go!
Let but Achilles oâer yon trench appear,
Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear;
Greece from one glance of that tremendous eye
Shall take new courage, and disdain to fly.â

She spoke, and passâd in air. The hero rose:
Her aegis Pallas oâer his shoulder throws;
Around his brows a golden cloud she spread;
A stream of glory flamed above his head.
As when from some beleaguerâd town arise
The smokes, high curling to the shaded skies;
(Seen from some island, oâer the main afar,
When men distressâd hang out the sign of war;)
Soon as the sun in ocean hides his rays,
Thick on the hills the flaming beacons blaze;
With long-projected beams the seas are bright,
And heavenâs high arch reflects the ruddy light:
So from Achillesâ head the splendours rise,
Reflecting blaze on blaze against the skies.
Forth marchâd the chief, and distant from the crowd,
High on the rampart raised his voice aloud;
With her own shout Minerva swells the sound;
Troy starts astonishâd, and the shores rebound.
As the loud trumpetâs brazen mouth from far
With shrilling clangour sounds the alarm of war,
Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high,
And the round bulwarks and thick towers reply;
So high his brazen voice the hero rearâd:
Hosts droppâd their arms, and trembled as they heard:
And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound,
And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
Aghast they see the living lightnings play,
And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised,
And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rushâd
On their own spears, by their own chariots crushâd:
While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain
The long-contended carcase of the slain.

A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears:
Around, his sad companions melt in tears.
But chief Achilles, bending down his head,
Pours unavailing sorrows oâer the dead,
Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car,
He sent refulgent to the field of war;
(Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found,
Stretchâd forth, and gashâd with many a gaping wound.

Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way,
In oceanâs waves the unwilling light of day
Quenchâd his red orb, at Junoâs high command,
And from their labours eased the Achaian band.
The frighted Trojans (panting from the war,
Their steeds unharnessâd from the weary car)
A sudden council callâd: each chief appearâd
In haste, and standing; for to sit they fearâd.
âTwas now no season for prolongâd debate;
They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.
Silent they stood: Polydamas at last,
Skillâd to discern the future by the past,
The son of Panthus, thus expressâd his fears
(The friend of Hector, and of equal years;
The self-same night to both a being gave,
One wise in council, one in action brave):


[Illustration: ] JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET


âIn free debate, my friends, your sentence speak;
For me, I move, before the morning break,
To raise our camp: too dangerous here our post,
Far from Troy walls, and on a naked coast.
I deemâd not Greece so dreadful, while engaged
In mutual feuds her king and hero raged;
Then, while we hoped our armies might prevail
We boldly campâd beside a thousand sail.
I dread Pelides now: his rage of mind
Not long continues to the shores confined,
Nor to the fields, where long in equal fray
Contending nations won and lost the day;
For Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the strife,
And the hard contest not for fame, but life.
Haste then to Ilion, while the favouring night
Detains these terrors, keeps that arm from fight.
If but the morrowâs sun behold us here,
That arm, those terrors, we shall feel, not fear;
And hearts that now disdain, shall leap with joy,
If heaven permit them then to enter Troy.
Let not my fatal prophecy be true,
Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue.
Whatever be our fate, yet let us try
What force of thought and reason can supply;
Let us on counsel for our guard depend;
The town her gates and bulwarks shall defend.
When morning dawns, our well-appointed powers,
Arrayâd in arms, shall line the lofty towers.
Let the fierce hero, then, when fury calls,
Vent his mad vengeance on our rocky walls,
Or fetch a thousand circles round the plain,
Till his spent coursers seek the fleet again:
So may his rage be tired, and labourâd down!
And dogs shall tear him ere he sack the town.â

âReturn! (said Hector, fired with stern disdain)
What! coop whole armies in our walls again?
Wasât not enough, ye valiant warriors, say,
Nine years imprisonâd in those towers ye lay?
Wide oâer the world was Ilion famed of old
For brass exhaustless, and for mines of gold:
But while inglorious in her walls we stayâd,
Sunk were her treasures, and her stores decayâd;
The Phrygians now her scatterâd spoils enjoy,
And proud Maeonia wastes the fruits of Troy.
Great Jove at length my arms to conquest calls,
And shuts the Grecians in their wooden walls,
Darest thou dispirit whom the gods incite?
Flies any Trojan? I shall stop his flight.
To better counsel then attention lend;
Take due refreshment, and the watch attend.
If there be one whose riches cost him care,
Forth let him bring them for the troops to share;
âTis better generously bestowâd on those,
Than left the plunder of our countryâs foes.
Soon as the morn the purple orient warms,
Fierce on yon navy will we pour our arms.
If great Achilles rise in all his might,
His be the danger: I shall stand the fight.
Honour, ye gods! or let me gain or give;
And live he glorious, whosoeâer shall live!
Mars is our common lord, alike to all;
And oft the victor triumphs, but to fall.â

The shouting host in loud applauses joinâd;
So Pallas robbâd the many of their mind;
To their own sense condemnâd, and left to choose
The worst advice, the better to refuse.

While the long night extends her sable reign,
Around Patroclus mournâd the Grecian train.
Stern in superior grief Pelides stood;
Those slaughtering arms, so used to bathe in blood,
Now clasp his clay-cold limbs: then gushing start
The tears, and sighs burst from his swelling heart.
The lion thus, with dreadful anguish stung,
Roars through the desert, and demands his young;
When the grim savage, to his rifled den
Too late returning, snuffs the track of men,
And oâer the vales and oâer the forest bounds;
His clamorous grief the bellowing wood resounds.
So grieves Achilles; and, impetuous, vents
To all his Myrmidons his loud laments.

âIn what vain promise, gods! did I engage,
When to console Menoetiusâ feeble age,
I vowed his much-loved offspring to restore,
Charged with rich spoils, to fair Opuntiaâs shore?[252]
But mighty Jove cuts short, with just disdain,
The long, long views of poor designing man!
One fate the warrior and the friend shall strike,
And Troyâs black sands must drink our blood alike:
Me too a wretched mother shall deplore,
An aged father never see me more!
Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay,
Then swift pursue thee on the darksome way.
Ere thy dear relics in the grave are laid,
Shall Hectorâs head be offerâd to thy shade;
That, with his arms, shall hang before thy shrine;
And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan line,
Sacred to vengeance, by this hand expire;
Their lives effused around thy flaming pyre.
Thus let me lie till then! thus, closely pressâd,
Bathe thy cold face, and sob upon thy breast!
While Trojan captives here thy mourners stay,
Weep all the night and murmur all the day:
Spoils of my arms, and thine; when, wasting wide,
Our swords kept time, and conquerâd side by side.â

He spoke, and bade the sad attendants round
Cleanse the pale corse, and wash each honourâd wound.
A massy caldron of stupendous frame
They brought, and placed it oâer the rising flame:
Then heapâd the lighted wood; the flame divides
Beneath the vase, and climbs around the sides:
In its wide womb they pour the rushing stream;
The boiling water bubbles to the brim.
The body then they bathe with pious toil,
Embalm the wounds, anoint the limbs with oil,
High on a bed of state extended laid,
And decent coverâd with a linen shade;
Last oâer the dead the milk-white veil they threw;
That done, their sorrows and their sighs renew.

Meanwhile to Juno, in the realms above,
(His wife and sister,) spoke almighty Jove.
âAt last thy will prevails: great Peleusâ son
Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won.
Say (for I know not), is their race divine,
And thou the mother of that martial line?â

âWhat words are these? (the imperial dame replies,
While anger flashâd from her majestic eyes)
Succour like this a mortal arm might lend,
And such success mere human wit attend:
And shall not I, the second power above,
Heavenâs queen, and consort of the thundering Jove,
Say, shall not I one nationâs fate command,
Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land?â


[Illustration: ] TRIPOD


So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dame
Reachâd the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
High-eminent amid the works divine,
Where heavenâs far-beaming brazen mansions shine.
There the lame architect the goddess found,
Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round,
While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew;
And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.
That day no common task his labour claimâd:
Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed,
That placed on living wheels of massy gold,
(Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit rollâd
From place to place, around the blessâd abodes
Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods:
For their fair handles now, oâerwrought with flowers,
In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours.
Just as responsive to his thought the frame
Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came:
Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair,
(With purple fillets round her braided hair,)
Observed her entering; her soft hand she pressâd,
And, smiling, thus the watery queen addressâd:

âWhat, goddess! this unusual favour draws?
All hail, and welcome! whatsoeâer the cause;
Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
Approach, and taste the dainties of the bower.â


[Illustration: ] THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN


High on a throne, with stars of silver graced,
And various artifice, the queen she placed;
A footstool at her feet: then calling, said,
âVulcan, draw near, âtis Thetis asks your aid.â
âThetis (replied the god) our powers may claim,
An ever-dear, an ever-honourâd name!
When my proud mother hurlâd me from the sky,
(My awkward form, it seems, displeased her eye,)
She, and Eurynome, my griefs redressâd,
And soft received me on their silver breast.
Even then these arts employâd my infant thought:
Chains, bracelets, pendants, all their toys, I wrought.
Nine years kept secret in the dark abode,
Secure I lay, concealâd from man and god:
Deep in a cavernâd rock my days were led;
The rushing ocean murmurâd oâer my head.
Now, since her presence glads our mansion, say,
For such desert what service can I pay?
Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our board to share
The genial rites, and hospitable fare;
While I the labours of the forge forego,
And bid the roaring bellows cease to blow.â

Then from his anvil the lame artist rose;
Wide with distorted legs oblique he goes,
And stills the bellows, and (in order laid)
Locks in their chests his instruments of trade.
Then with a sponge the sooty workman dressâd
His brawny arms embrownâd, and hairy breast.
With his huge sceptre graced, and red attire,
Came halting forth the sovereign of the fire:
The monarchâs steps two female forms uphold,
That moved and breathed in animated gold;
To whom was voice, and sense, and science given
Of works divine (such wonders are in heaven!)
On these supported, with unequal gait,
He reachâd the throne where pensive Thetis sate;
There placed beside her on the shining frame,
He thus addressâd the silver-footed dame:

âThee, welcome, goddess! what occasion calls
(So long a stranger) to these honourâd walls?
âTis thine, fair Thetis, the command to lay,
And Vulcanâs joy and duty to obey.â


[Illustration: ] VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS


To whom the mournful mother thus replies:
(The crystal drops stood trembling in her eyes:)
âO Vulcan! say, was ever breast divine
So pierced with sorrows, so oâerwhelmâd as mine?
Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepare
For Thetis only such a weight of care?
I, only I, of all the watery race
By force subjected to a manâs embrace,
Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, pays
The mighty fine imposed on length of days.
Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came,
The bravest sure that ever bore the name;
Like some fair plant beneath my careful hand
He grew, he flourishâd, and adornâd the land!
To Troy I sent him! but his native shore
Never, ah never, shall receive him more;
(Even while he lives, he wastes with secret woe;)
Nor I, a goddess, can retard the blow!
Robbâd of the prize the Grecian suffrage gave,
The king of nations forced his royal slave:
For this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppressâd
Required his arm, he sorrowâd unredressâd.
Large gifts they promise, and their elders send;
In vainâhe arms not, but permits his friend
His arms, his steeds, his forces to employ:
He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy:
Then slain by PhÅbus (Hector had the name)
At once resigns his armour, life, and fame.
But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won:
Grace with immortal arms this short-lived son,
And to the field in martial pomp restore,
To shine with glory, till he shines no more!â

To her the artist-god: âThy griefs resign,
Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.
O could I hide him from the Fates, as well,
Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel,
As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze
Of wondering ages, and the worldâs amaze!â

Thus having said, the father of the fires
To the black labours of his forge retires.
Soon as he bade them blow, the bellows turnâd
Their iron mouths; and where the furnace burnâd,
Resounding breathed: at once the blast expires,
And twenty forges catch at once the fires;
Just as the god directs, now loud, now low,
They raise a tempest, or they gently blow;
In hissing flames huge silver bars are rollâd,
And stubborn brass, and tin, and solid gold;
Before, deep fixâd, the eternal anvils stand;
The ponderous hammer loads his better hand,
His left with tongs turns the vexâd metal round,
And thick, strong strokes, the doubling vaults rebound.

Then first he formâd the immense and solid shield;
Rich various artifice emblazed the field;
Its utmost verge a threefold circle bound;[253]
A silver chain suspends the massy round;
Five ample plates the broad expanse compose,
And godlike labours on the surface rose.
There shone the image of the master-mind:
There earth, there heaven, there ocean he designâd;
The unwearied sun, the moon completely round;
The starry lights that heavenâs high convex crownâd;
The Pleiads, Hyads, with the northern team;
And great Orionâs more refulgent beam;
To which, around the axle of the sky,
The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye,
Still shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.

Two cities radiant on the shield appear,
The image one of peace, and one of war.
Here sacred pomp and genial feast delight,
And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite;
Along the street the new-made brides are led,
With torches flaming, to the nuptial bed:
The youthful dancers in a circle bound
To the soft flute, and cithernâs silver sound:
Through the fair streets the matrons in a row
Stand in their porches, and enjoy the show.

There in the forum swarm a numerous train;
The subject of debate, a townsman slain:
One pleads the fine discharged, which one denied,
And bade the public and the laws decide:
The witness is produced on either hand:
For this, or that, the partial people stand:
The appointed heralds still the noisy bands,
And form a ring, with sceptres in their hands:
On seats of stone, within the sacred place,[254]
The reverend elders nodded oâer the case;
Alternate, each the attesting sceptre took,
And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke.
Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight,
The prize of him who best adjudged the right.

Another part (a prospect differing far)[255]
Glowâd with refulgent arms, and horrid war.
Two mighty hosts a leaguerâd town embrace,
And one would pillage, one would burn the place.
Meantime the townsmen, armâd with silent care,
A secret ambush on the foe prepare:
Their wives, their children, and the watchful band
Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand.
They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold:
Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold,
And gold their armour: these the squadron led,
August, divine, superior by the head!
A place for ambush fit they found, and stood,
Coverâd with shields, beside a silver flood.
Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem
If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.
Soon the white flocks proceeded oâer the plains,
And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains;
Behind them piping on their reeds they go,
Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe.
In arms the glittering squadron rising round
Rush sudden; hills of slaughter heap the ground;
Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the plains,
And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains!
The bellowing oxen the besiegers hear;
They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war,
They fight, they fall, beside the silver flood;
The waving silver seemâd to blush with blood.
There Tumult, there Contention stood confessâd;
One rearâd a dagger at a captiveâs breast;
One held a living foe, that freshly bled
With new-made wounds; another draggâd a dead;
Now here, now there, the carcases they tore:
Fate stalkâd amidst them, grim with human gore.
And the whole war came out, and met the eye;
And each bold figure seemâd to live or die.

A field deep furrowâd next the god designâd,[256]
The third time labourâd by the sweating hind;
The shining shares full many ploughmen guide,
And turn their crooked yokes on every side.
Still as at either end they wheel around,
The master meets them with his goblet crownâd;
The hearty draught rewards, renews their toil,
Then back the turning ploughshares cleave the soil:
Behind, the rising earth in ridges rollâd;
And sable lookâd, though formâd of molten gold.

Another field rose high with waving grain;
With bended sickles stand the reaper train:
Here stretched in ranks the levellâd swarths are found,
Sheaves heapâd on sheaves here thicken up the ground.
With sweeping stroke the mowers strow the lands;
The gatherers follow, and collect in bands;
And last the children, in whose arms are borne
(Too short to gripe them) the brown sheaves of corn.
The rustic monarch of the field descries,
With silent glee, the heaps around him rise.
A ready banquet on the turf is laid,
Beneath an ample oakâs expanded shade.
The victim ox the sturdy youth prepare;
The reaperâs due repast, the womanâs care.

Next, ripe in yellow gold, a vineyard shines,
Bent with the ponderous harvest of its vines;
A deeper dye the dangling clusters show,
And curlâd on silver props, in order glow:
A darker metal mixâd intrenchâd the place;
And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace.
To this, one pathway gently winding leads,
Where march a train with baskets on their heads,
(Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bear
The purple product of the autumnal year.
To these a youth awakes the warbling strings,
Whose tender lay the fate of Linus sings;
In measured dance behind him move the train,
Tune soft the voice, and answer to the strain.

Here herds of oxen march, erect and bold,
Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold,
And speed to meadows on whose sounding shores
A rapid torrent through the rushes roars:
Four golden herdsmen as their guardians stand,
And nine sour dogs complete the rustic band.
Two lions rushing from the wood appearâd;
And seized a bull, the master of the herd:
He roarâd: in vain the dogs, the men withstood;
They tore his flesh, and drank his sable blood.
The dogs (oft cheerâd in vain) desert the prey,
Dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay.

Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leads
Deep through fair forests, and a length of meads,
And stalls, and folds, and scatterâd cots between;
And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the scene.

A figured dance succeeds; such once was seen
In lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen,
Formâd by Daedalean art; a comely band
Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand.
The maids in soft simars of linen dressâd;
The youths all graceful in the glossy vest:
Of those the locks with flowery wreath inrollâd;
Of these the sides adornâd with swords of gold,
That glittering gay, from silver belts depend.
Now all at once they rise, at once descend,
With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways,
Confusedly regular, the moving maze:
Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring,
And undistinguishâd blend the flying ring:
So whirls a wheel, in giddy circle tossâd,
And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost.
The gazing multitudes admire around:
Two active tumblers in the centre bound;
Now high, now low, their pliant limbs they bend:
And general songs the sprightly revel end.

Thus the broad shield complete the artist crownâd
With his last hand, and pourâd the ocean round:
In living silver seemâd the waves to roll,
And beat the bucklerâs verge, and bound the whole.

This done, whateâer a warriorâs use requires
He forged; the cuirass that outshone the fires,
The greaves of ductile tin, the helm impressâd
With various sculpture, and the golden crest.
At Thetisâ feet the finished labour lay:
She, as a falcon cuts the aerial way,
Swift from Olympusâ snowy summit flies,
And bears the blazing present through the skies.[257]




BOOK XIX.


ARGUMENT.


THE RECONCILIATION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.


Thetis brings to her son the armour made by Vulcan. She preserves the
body of his friend from corruption, and commands him to assemble the
army, to declare his resentment at an end. Agamemnon and Achilles are
solemnly reconciled: the speeches, presents, and ceremonies on that
occasion. Achilles is with great difficulty persuaded to refrain from
the battle till the troops have refreshed themselves by the advice of
Ulysses. The presents are conveyed to the tent of Achilles, where
BriseÃ¯s laments over the body of Patroclus. The hero obstinately
refuses all repast, and gives himself up to lamentations for his
friend. Minerva descends to strengthen him, by the order of Jupiter. He
arms for the fight: his appearance described. He addresses himself to
his horses, and reproaches them with the death of Patroclus. One of
them is miraculously endued with voice, and inspired to prophesy his
fate: but the hero, not astonished by that prodigy, rushes with fury to
the combat.
    The thirtieth day. The scene is on the sea-shore.


Soon as Aurora heaved her Orient head
Above the waves, that blushâd with early red,
(With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,)
The immortal arms the goddess-mother bears
Swift to her son: her son she finds in tears
Stretchâd oâer Patroclusâ corse; while all the rest
Their sovereignâs sorrows in their own expressâd.
A ray divine her heavenly presence shed,
And thus, his hand soft touching, Thetis said:

âSuppress, my son, this rage of grief, and know
It was not man, but heaven, that gave the blow;
Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestowâd,
Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a god.â

Then drops the radiant burden on the ground;
Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around;
Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise,
And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes.
Unmoved the hero kindles at the show,
And feels with rage divine his bosom glow;
From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,
And flash incessant like a stream of fire:
He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind
On all the immortal artist had designâd.

âGoddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine
With matchless art, confess the hand divine.
Now to the bloody battle let me bend:
But ah! the relics of my slaughterâd friend!
In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled,
Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?â

âThat unavailing care be laid aside,
(The azure goddess to her son replied,)
Whole years untouchâd, uninjured shall remain,
Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.
But go, Achilles, as affairs require,
Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire:
Then uncontrollâd in boundless war engage,
And heaven with strength supply the mighty rage!â


[Illustration: ] THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES


Then in the nostrils of the slain she pourâd
Nectareous drops, and rich ambrosia showerâd
Oâer all the corse. The flies forbid their prey,
Untouchâd it rests, and sacred from decay.
Achilles to the strand obedient went:
The shores resounded with the voice he sent.
The heroes heard, and all the naval train
That tend the ships, or guide them oâer the main,
Alarmâd, transported, at the well-known sound,
Frequent and full, the great assembly crownâd;
Studious to see the terror of the plain,
Long lost to battle, shine in arms again.
Tydides and Ulysses first appear,
Lame with their wounds, and leaning on the spear;
These on the sacred seats of council placed,
The king of men, Atrides, came the last:
He too sore wounded by Agenorâs son.
Achilles (rising in the midst) begun:

âO monarch! better far had been the fate
Of thee, of me, of all the Grecian state,
If (ere the day when by mad passion swayâd,
Rash we contended for the black-eyed maid)
Preventing Dian had despatchâd her dart,
And shot the shining mischief to the heart!
Then many a hero had not pressâd the shore,
Nor Troyâs glad fields been fattenâd with our gore.
Long, long shall Greece the woes we caused bewail,
And sad posterity repeat the tale.
But this, no more the subject of debate,
Is past, forgotten, and resignâd to fate.
Why should, alas, a mortal man, as I,
Burn with a fury that can never die?
Here then my anger ends: let war succeed,
And even as Greece has bled, let Ilion bleed.
Now call the hosts, and try if in our sight
Troy yet shall dare to camp a second night!
I deem, their mightiest, when this arm he knows,
Shall âscape with transport, and with joy repose.â

He said: his finishâd wrath with loud acclaim
The Greeks accept, and shout Pelidesâ name.
When thus, not rising from his lofty throne,
In state unmoved, the king of men begun:

âHear me, ye sons of Greece! with silence hear!
And grant your monarch an impartial ear:
Awhile your loud, untimely joy suspend,
And let your rash, injurious clamours end:
Unruly murmurs, or ill-timed applause,
Wrong the best speaker, and the justest cause.
Nor charge on me, ye Greeks, the dire debate:
Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate,
With fell Erinnys, urged my wrath that day
When from Achillesâ arms I forced the prey.
What then could I against the will of heaven?
Not by myself, but vengeful Ate driven;
She, Joveâs dread daughter, fated to infest
The race of mortals, enterâd in my breast.
Not on the ground that haughty fury treads,
But prints her lofty footsteps on the heads
Of mighty men; inflicting as she goes
Long-festering wounds, inextricable woes!
Of old, she stalkâd amid the bright abodes;
And Jove himself, the sire of men and gods,
The worldâs great ruler, felt her venomâd dart;
Deceived by Junoâs wiles, and female art:
For when Alcmenaâs nine long months were run,
And Jove expected his immortal son,
To gods and goddesses the unruly joy
He showâd, and vaunted of his matchless boy:
âFrom us, (he said) this day an infant springs,
Fated to rule, and born a king of kings.â
Saturnia askâd an oath, to vouch the truth,
And fix dominion on the favourâd youth.
The Thunderer, unsuspicious of the fraud,
Pronounced those solemn words that bind a god.
The joyful goddess, from Olympusâ height,
Swift to Achaian Argos bent her flight:
Scarce seven moons gone, lay Sthenelusâs wife;
She pushâd her lingering infant into life:
Her charms Alcmenaâs coming labours stay,
And stop the babe, just issuing to the day.
Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind;
âA youth (said she) of Joveâs immortal kind
Is this day born: from Sthenelus he springs,
And claims thy promise to be king of kings.â
Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath engaged;
Stung to the soul, he sorrowâd, and he raged.
From his ambrosial head, where perchâd she sate,
He snatchâd the fury-goddess of debate,
The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore,
The immortal seats should neâer behold her more;
And whirlâd her headlong down, for ever driven
From bright Olympus and the starry heaven:
Thence on the nether world the fury fell;
Ordainâd with manâs contentious race to dwell.
Full oft the god his sonâs hard toils bemoanâd,
Cursed the dire fury, and in secret groanâd.[258]
Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled,
While raging Hector heapâd our camps with dead.
What can the errors of my rage atone?
My martial troops, my treasures are thy own:
This instant from the navy shall be sent
Whateâer Ulysses promised at thy tent:
But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer,
Resume thy arms, and shine again in war.â

âO king of nations! whose superior sway
(Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!
To keep or send the presents, be thy care;
To us, âtis equal: all we ask is war.
While yet we talk, or but an instant shun
The fight, our glorious work remains undone.
Let every Greek, who sees my spear confound
The Trojan ranks, and deal destruction round,
With emulation, what I act survey,
And learn from thence the business of the day.â

The son of Peleus thus; and thus replies
The great in councils, Ithacus the wise:
âThough, godlike, thou art by no toils oppressâd,
At least our armies claim repast and rest:
Long and laborious must the combat be,
When by the gods inspired, and led by thee.
Strength is derived from spirits and from blood,
And those augment by generous wine and food:
What boastful son of war, without that stay,
Can last a hero through a single day?
Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his strength,
Mere unsupported man must yield at length;
Shrunk with dry famine, and with toils declined,
The drooping body will desert the mind:
But built anew with strength-conferring fare,
With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a war.
Dismiss the people, then, and give command,
With strong repast to hearten every band;
But let the presents to Achilles made,
In full assembly of all Greece be laid.
The king of men shall rise in public sight,
And solemn swear (observant of the rite)
That, spotless, as she came, the maid removes,
Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
That done, a sumptuous banquet shall be made,
And the full price of injured honour paid.
Stretch not henceforth, O prince! thy sovereign might
Beyond the bounds of reason and of right;
âTis the chief praise that eâer to kings belongâd,
To right with justice whom with power they wrongâd.â

To him the monarch: âJust is thy decree,
Thy words give joy, and wisdom breathes in thee.
Each due atonement gladly I prepare;
And heaven regard me as I justly swear!
Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay,
Nor great Achilles grudge this short delay.
Till from the fleet our presents be conveyâd,
And Jove attesting, the firm compact made.
A train of noble youths the charge shall bear;
These to select, Ulysses, be thy care:
In order rankâd let all our gifts appear,
And the fair train of captives close the rear:
Talthybius shall the victim boar convey,
Sacred to Jove, and yon bright orb of day.â

âFor this (the stern Ãacides replies)
Some less important season may suffice,
When the stern fury of the war is oâer,
And wrath, extinguishâd, burns my breast no more.
By Hector slain, their faces to the sky,
All grim with gaping wounds, our heroes lie:
Those call to war! and might my voice incite,
Now, now, this instant, shall commence the fight:
Then, when the dayâs complete, let generous bowls,
And copious banquets, glad your weary souls.
Let not my palate know the taste of food,
Till my insatiate rage be cloyâd with blood:
Pale lies my friend, with wounds disfigured oâer,
And his cold feet are pointed to the door.
Revenge is all my soul! no meaner care,
Interest, or thought, has room to harbour there;
Destruction be my feast, and mortal wounds,
And scenes of blood, and agonizing sounds.â

âO first of Greeks, (Ulysses thus rejoinâd,)
The best and bravest of the warrior kind!
Thy praise it is in dreadful camps to shine,
But old experience and calm wisdom mine.
Then hear my counsel, and to reason yield,
The bravest soon are satiate of the field;
Though vast the heaps that strow the crimson plain,
The bloody harvest brings but little gain:
The scale of conquest ever wavering lies,
Great Jove but turns it, and the victor dies!
The great, the bold, by thousands daily fall,
And endless were the grief, to weep for all.
Eternal sorrows what avails to shed?
Greece honours not with solemn fasts the dead:
Enough, when death demands the brave, to pay
The tribute of a melancholy day.
One chief with patience to the grave resignâd,
Our care devolves on others left behind.
Let generous food supplies of strength produce,
Let rising spirits flow from sprightly juice,
Let their warm heads with scenes of battle glow,
And pour new furies on the feebler foe.
Yet a short interval, and none shall dare
Expect a second summons to the war;
Who waits for that, the dire effects shall find,
If trembling in the ships he lags behind.
Embodied, to the battle let us bend,
And all at once on haughty Troy descend.â

And now the delegates Ulysses sent,
To bear the presents from the royal tent:
The sons of Nestor, Phyleusâ valiant heir,
Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war,
With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain,
And Melanippus, formâd the chosen train.
Swift as the word was given, the youths obeyâd:
Twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid;
A row of six fair tripods then succeeds;
And twice the number of high-bounding steeds:
Seven captives next a lovely line compose;
The eighth BriseÃ¯s, like the blooming rose,
Closed the bright band: great Ithacus, before,
First of the train, the golden talents bore:
The rest in public view the chiefs dispose,
A splendid scene! then Agamemnon rose:
The boar Talthybius held: the Grecian lord
Drew the broad cutlass sheathâd beside his sword:
The stubborn bristles from the victimâs brow
He crops, and offering meditates his vow.
His hands uplifted to the attesting skies,
On heavenâs broad marble roof were fixed his eyes.
The solemn words a deep attention draw,
And Greece around sat thrillâd with sacred awe.

âWitness thou first! thou greatest power above,
All-good, all-wise, and all-surveying Jove!
And mother-earth, and heavenâs revolving light,
And ye, fell furies of the realms of night,
Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
The black-eyed maid inviolate removes,
Pure and unconscious of my manly loves.
If this be false, heaven all its vengeance shed,
And levellâd thunder strike my guilty head!â

With that, his weapon deep inflicts the wound;
The bleeding savage tumbles to the ground;
The sacred herald rolls the victim slain
(A feast for fish) into the foaming main.

Then thus Achilles: âHear, ye Greeks! and know
Whateâer we feel, âtis Jove inflicts the woe;
Not else Atrides could our rage inflame,
Nor from my arms, unwilling, force the dame.
âTwas Joveâs high will alone, oâerruling all,
That doomâd our strife, and doomâd the Greeks to fall.
Go then, ye chiefs! indulge the genial rite;
Achilles waits ye, and expects the fight.â

The speedy council at his word adjournâd:
To their black vessels all the Greeks returnâd.
Achilles sought his tent. His train before
Marchâd onward, bending with the gifts they bore.
Those in the tents the squires industrious spread:
The foaming coursers to the stalls they led;
To their new seats the female captives move.
BriseÃ¯s, radiant as the queen of love,
Slow as she passâd, beheld with sad survey
Where, gashâd with cruel wounds, Patroclus lay.
Prone on the body fell the heavenly fair,
Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair;
All beautiful in grief, her humid eyes
Shining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries:

âAh, youth for ever dear, for ever kind,
Once tender friend of my distracted mind!
I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay;
Now find thee cold, inanimated clay!
What woes my wretched race of life attend!
Sorrows on sorrows, never doomâd to end!
The first loved consort of my virgin bed
Before these eyes in fatal battle bled:
My three brave brothers in one mournful day
All trod the dark, irremeable way:
Thy friendly hand uprearâd me from the plain,
And dried my sorrows for a husband slain;
Achillesâ care you promised I should prove,
The first, the dearest partner of his love;
That rites divine should ratify the band,
And make me empress in his native land.
Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow,
For thee, that ever felt anotherâs woe!â

Her sister captives echoed groan for groan,
Nor mournâd Patroclusâ fortunes, but their own.
The leaders pressâd the chief on every side;
Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied.

âIf yet Achilles have a friend, whose care
Is bent to please him, this request forbear;
Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay
To grief and anguish one abstemious day.â

He spoke, and from the warriors turnâd his face:
Yet still the brother-kings of Atreusâ race.
Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,
And PhÅnix, strive to calm his grief and rage:
His rage they calm not, nor his grief control;
He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul.

âThou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents)
Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents:
Thy sweet society, thy winning care,
Once stayâd Achilles, rushing to the war.
But now, alas! to deathâs cold arms resignâd,
What banquet but revenge can glad my mind?
What greater sorrow could afflict my breast,
What more if hoary Peleus were deceased?
Who now, perhaps, in Phthia dreads to hear
His sonâs sad fate, and drops a tender tear.
What more, should Neoptolemus the brave,
My only offspring, sink into the grave?
If yet that offspring lives; (I distant far,
Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.)
I could not this, this cruel stroke attend;
Fate claimâd Achilles, but might spare his friend.
I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear
My tender orphan with a parentâs care,
From Scyrosâ isle conduct him oâer the main,
And glad his eyes with his paternal reign,
The lofty palace, and the large domain.
For Peleus breathes no more the vital air;
Or drags a wretched life of age and care,
But till the news of my sad fate invades
His hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades.â

Sighing he said: his grief the heroes joinâd,
Each stole a tear for what he left behind.
Their mingled grief the sire of heaven surveyâd,
And thus with pity to his blue-eyed maid:

âIs then Achilles now no more thy care,
And dost thou thus desert the great in war?
Lo, where yon sails their canvas wings extend,
All comfortless he sits, and wails his friend:
Ere thirst and want his forces have oppressâd,
Haste and infuse ambrosia in his breast.â

He spoke; and sudden, at the word of Jove,
Shot the descending goddess from above.
So swift through ether the shrill harpy springs,
The wide air floating to her ample wings,
To great Achilles she her flight addressâd,
And pourâd divine ambrosia in his breast,[259]
With nectar sweet, (refection of the gods!)
Then, swift ascending, sought the bright abodes.

Now issued from the ships the warrior-train,
And like a deluge pourâd upon the plain.
As when the piercing blasts of Boreas blow,
And scatter oâer the fields the driving snow;
From dusky clouds the fleecy winter flies,
Whose dazzling lustre whitens all the skies:
So helms succeeding helms, so shields from shields,
Catch the quick beams, and brighten all the fields;
Broad glittering breastplates, spears with pointed rays,
Mix in one stream, reflecting blaze on blaze;
Thick beats the centre as the coursers bound;
With splendour flame the skies, and laugh the fields around,

Full in the midst, high-towering oâer the rest,
His limbs in arms divine Achilles dressâd;
Arms which the father of the fire bestowâd,
Forged on the eternal anvils of the god.
Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire,
His glowing eyeballs roll with living fire;
He grinds his teeth, and furious with delay
Oâerlooks the embattled host, and hopes the bloody day.

The silver cuishes first his thighs infold;
Then oâer his breast was braced the hollow gold;
The brazen sword a various baldric tied,
That, starrâd with gems, hung glittering at his side;
And, like the moon, the broad refulgent shield
Blazed with long rays, and gleamâd athwart the field.

So to night-wandering sailors, pale with fears,
Wide oâer the watery waste, a light appears,
Which on the far-seen mountain blazing high,
Streams from some lonely watch-tower to the sky:
With mournful eyes they gaze, and gaze again;
Loud howls the storm, and drives them oâer the main.

Next, his high head the helmet graced; behind
The sweepy crest hung floating in the wind:
Like the red star, that from his flaming hair
Shakes down diseases, pestilence, and war;
So streamâd the golden honours from his head,
Trembled the sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed.
The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes;
His arms he poises, and his motions tries;
Buoyâd by some inward force, he seems to swim,
And feels a pinion lifting every limb.

And now he shakes his great paternal spear,
Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear,
From Pelionâs cloudy top an ash entire
Old Chiron fellâd, and shaped it for his sire;
A spear which stern Achilles only wields,
The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

Automedon and Alcimus prepare
The immortal coursers, and the radiant car;
(The silver traces sweeping at their side;)
Their fiery mouths resplendent bridles tied;
The ivory-studded reins, returnâd behind,
Waved oâer their backs, and to the chariot joinâd.
The charioteer then whirlâd the lash around,
And swift ascended at one active bound.
All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire
Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire;
Not brighter PhÅbus in the ethereal way
Flames from his chariot, and restores the day.
High oâer the host, all terrible he stands,
And thunders to his steeds these dread commands:

âXanthus and Balius! of Podargesâ strain,
(Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain,)
Be swift, be mindful of the load ye bear,
And learn to make your master more your care:
Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword,
Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your lord.â

The generous Xanthus, as the words he said,
Seemâd sensible of woe, and droopâd his head:
Trembling he stood before the golden wain,
And bowâd to dust the honours of his mane.
When, strange to tell! (so Juno willâd) he broke
Eternal silence, and portentous spoke.
âAchilles! yes! this day at least we bear
Thy rage in safety through the files of war:
But come it will, the fatal time must come,
Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom.
Not through our crime, or slowness in the course,
Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly force;
The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day
(Confessâd we saw him) tore his arms away.
Noâcould our swiftness oâer the winds prevail,
Or beat the pinions of the western gale,
All were in vainâthe Fates thy death demand,
Due to a mortal and immortal hand.â

Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,
His fateful voice. The intrepid chief replied
With unabated rageââSo let it be!
Portents and prodigies are lost on me.
I know my fate: to die, to see no more
My much-loved parents, and my native shoreâ
Enoughâwhen heaven ordains, I sink in night:
Now perish Troy!â He said, and rushâd to fight.


[Illustration: ] HERCULES




BOOK XX.


ARGUMENT.


THE BATTLE OF THE GODS, AND THE ACTS OF ACHILLES.


Jupiter, upon Achillesâ return to the battle, calls a council of the
gods, and permits them to assist either party. The terrors of the
combat described, when the deities are engaged. Apollo encourages Ãneas
to meet Achilles. After a long conversation, these two heroes
encounter; but Ãneas is preserved by the assistance of Neptune.
Achilles falls upon the rest of the Trojans, and is upon the point of
killing Hector, but Apollo conveys him away in a cloud. Achilles
pursues the Trojans with a great slaughter.
    The same day continues. The scene is in the field before Troy.


Thus round Pelides breathing war and blood
Greece, sheathed in arms, beside her vessels stood;
While near impending from a neighbouring height,
Troyâs black battalions wait the shock of fight.
Then Jove to Themis gives command, to call
The gods to council in the starry hall:
Swift oâer Olympusâ hundred hills she flies,
And summons all the senate of the skies.
These shining on, in long procession come
To Joveâs eternal adamantine dome.
Not one was absent, not a rural power
That haunts the verdant gloom, or rosy bower;
Each fair-hairâd dryad of the shady wood,
Each azure sister of the silver flood;
All but old Ocean, hoary sire! who keeps
His ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps.
On marble thrones, with lucid columns crownâd,
(The work of Vulcan,) sat the powers around.
Even he whose trident sways the watery reign
Heard the loud summons, and forsook the main,
Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes,
And questionâd thus the sire of men and gods:

âWhat moves the god who heaven and earth commands,
And grasps the thunder in his awful hands,
Thus to convene the whole ethereal state?
Is Greece and Troy the subject in debate?
Already met, the louring hosts appear,
And death stands ardent on the edge of war.â

ââTis true (the cloud-compelling power replies)
This day we call the council of the skies
In care of human race; even Joveâs own eye
Sees with regret unhappy mortals die.
Far on Olympusâ top in secret state
Ourself will sit, and see the hand of fate
Work out our will. Celestial powers! descend,
And as your minds direct, your succour lend
To either host. Troy soon must lie oâerthrown,
If uncontrollâd Achilles fights alone:
Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes;
What can they now, if in his rage he rise?
Assist them, gods! or Ilionâs sacred wall
May fall this day, though fate forbids the fall.â
He said, and fired their heavenly breasts with rage.

On adverse parts the warring gods engage:
Heavenâs awful queen; and he whose azure round
Girds the vast globe; the maid in arms renownâd;
Hermes, of profitable arts the sire;
And Vulcan, the black sovereign of the fire:
These to the fleet repair with instant flight;
The vessels tremble as the gods alight.
In aid of Troy, Latona, PhÅbus came,
Mars fiery-helmâd, the laughter-loving dame,
Xanthus, whose streams in golden currents flow,
And the chaste huntress of the silver bow.
Ere yet the gods their various aid employ,
Each Argive bosom swellâd with manly joy,
While great Achilles (terror of the plain),
Long lost to battle, shone in arms again.
Dreadful he stood in front of all his host;
Pale Troy beheld, and seemâd already lost;
Her bravest heroes pant with inward fear,
And trembling see another god of war.

But when the powers descending swellâd the fight,
Then tumult rose: fierce rage and pale affright
Varied each face: then Discord sounds alarms,
Earth echoes, and the nations rush to arms.
Now through the trembling shores Minerva calls,
And now she thunders from the Grecian walls.
Mars hovering oâer his Troy, his terror shrouds
In gloomy tempests, and a night of clouds:
Now through each Trojan heart he fury pours
With voice divine, from Ilionâs topmost towers:
Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous hill;
The mountain shook, the rapid stream stood still.

Above, the sire of gods his thunder rolls,
And peals on peals redoubled rend the poles.
Beneath, stern Neptune shakes the solid ground;
The forests wave, the mountains nod around;
Through all their summits tremble Idaâs woods,
And from their sources boil her hundred floods.
Troyâs turrets totter on the rocking plain,
And the tossâd navies beat the heaving main.
Deep in the dismal regions of the dead,[260]
The infernal monarch rearâd his horrid head,
Leapâd from his throne, lest Neptuneâs arm should lay
His dark dominions open to the day,
And pour in light on Plutoâs drear abodes,
Abhorrâd by men, and dreadful even to gods.[261]


[Illustration: ] THE GODS DESCENDING TO BATTLE


Such war the immortals wage; such horrors rend
The worldâs vast concave, when the gods contend.
First silver-shafted PhÅbus took the plain
Against blue Neptune, monarch of the main.
The god of arms his giant bulk displayâd,
Opposed to Pallas, warâs triumphant maid.
Against Latona marchâd the son of May.
The quiverâd Dian, sister of the day,
(Her golden arrows sounding at her side,)
Saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied.
With fiery Vulcan last in battle stands
The sacred flood that rolls on golden sands;
Xanthus his name with those of heavenly birth,
But called Scamander by the sons of earth.

While thus the gods in various league engage,
Achilles glowâd with more than mortal rage:
Hector he sought; in search of Hector turnâd
His eyes around, for Hector only burnâd;
And burst like lightning through the ranks, and vowâd
To glut the god of battles with his blood.

Ãneas was the first who dared to stay;
Apollo wedged him in the warriorâs way,
But swellâd his bosom with undaunted might,
Half-forced and half-persuaded to the fight.
Like young Lycaon, of the royal line,
In voice and aspect, seemâd the power divine;
And bade the chief reflect, how late with scorn
In distant threats he braved the goddess-born.

Then thus the hero of Anchisesâ strain:
âTo meet Pelides you persuade in vain:
Already have I met, nor void of fear
Observed the fury of his flying spear;
From Idaâs woods he chased us to the field,
Our force he scattered, and our herds he killâd;
Lyrnessus, Pedasus in ashes lay;
But (Jove assisting) I survived the day:
Else had I sunk oppressâd in fatal fight
By fierce Achilles and Minervaâs might.
Whereâer he moved, the goddess shone before,
And bathed his brazen lance in hostile gore.
What mortal man Achilles can sustain?
The immortals guard him through the dreadful plain,
And suffer not his dart to fall in vain.
Were God my aid, this arm should check his power,
Though strong in battle as a brazen tower.â

To whom the son of Jove: âThat god implore,
And be what great Achilles was before.
From heavenly Venus thou derivâst thy strain,
And he but from a sister of the main;
An aged sea-god father of his line;
But Jove himself the sacred source of thine.
Then lift thy weapon for a noble blow,
Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe.â

This said, and spirit breathed into his breast,
Through the thick troops the emboldenâd hero pressâd:
His venturous act the white-armâd queen surveyâd,
And thus, assembling all the powers, she said:

âBehold an action, gods! that claims your care,
Lo great Ãneas rushing to the war!
Against Pelides he directs his course,
PhÅbus impels, and PhÅbus gives him force.
Restrain his bold career; at least, to attend
Our favourâd hero, let some power descend.
To guard his life, and add to his renown,
We, the great armament of heaven, came down.
Hereafter let him fall, as Fates design,
That spun so short his lifeâs illustrious line:[262]
But lest some adverse god now cross his way,
Give him to know what powers assist this day:
For how shall mortal stand the dire alarms,
When heavenâs refulgent host appear in arms?â[263]

Thus she; and thus the god whose force can make
The solid globeâs eternal basis shake:
âAgainst the might of man, so feeble known,
Why should celestial powers exert their own?
Suffice from yonder mount to view the scene,
And leave to war the fates of mortal men.
But if the armipotent, or god of light,
Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight,
Thence on the gods of Troy we swift descend:
Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end;
And these, in ruin and confusion hurlâd,
Yield to our conquering arms the lower world.â

Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea,
Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way.
Advanced upon the field there stood a mound
Of earth congested, wallâd, and trenchâd around;
In elder times to guard Alcides made,
(The work of Trojans, with Minervaâs aid,)
What time a vengeful monster of the main
Swept the wide shore, and drove him to the plain.

Here Neptune and the gods of Greece repair,
With clouds encompassâd, and a veil of air:
The adverse powers, around Apollo laid,
Crown the fair hills that silver Simois shade.
In circle close each heavenly party sat,
Intent to form the future scheme of fate;
But mix not yet in fight, though Jove on high
Gives the loud signal, and the heavens reply.

Meanwhile the rushing armies hide the ground;
The trampled centre yields a hollow sound:
Steeds cased in mail, and chiefs in armour bright,
The gleaming champaign glows with brazen light.
Amid both hosts (a dreadful space) appear,
There great Achilles; bold Ãneas, here.
With towering strides Ãneas first advanced;
The nodding plumage on his helmet danced:
Spread oâer his breast the fencing shield he bore,
And, so he moved, his javelin flamed before.
Not so Pelides; furious to engage,
He rushâd impetuous. Such the lionâs rage,
Who viewing first his foes with scornful eyes,
Though all in arms the peopled city rise,
Stalks careless on, with unregarding pride;
Till at the length, by some brave youth defied,
To his bold spear the savage turns alone,
He murmurs fury with a hollow groan;
He grins, he foams, he rolls his eyes around,
Lashâd by his tail his heaving sides resound;
He calls up all his rage; he grinds his teeth,
Resolved on vengeance, or resolved on death.
So fierce Achilles on Ãneas flies;
So stands Ãneas, and his force defies.
Ere yet the stern encounter joinâd, begun
The seed of Thetis thus to Venusâ son:

âWhy comes Ãneas through the ranks so far?
Seeks he to meet Achillesâ arm in war,
In hope the realms of Priam to enjoy,
And prove his merits to the throne of Troy?
Grant that beneath thy lance Achilles dies,
The partial monarch may refuse the prize;
Sons he has many; those thy pride may quell:
And âtis his fault to love those sons too well,
Or, in reward of thy victorious hand,
Has Troy proposed some spacious tract of land,
An ample forest, or a fair domain,
Of hills for vines, and arable for grain?
Even this, perhaps, will hardly prove thy lot.
But can Achilles be so soon forgot?
Once (as I think) you saw this brandishâd spear,
And then the great Ãneas seemâd to fear:
With hearty haste from Idaâs mount he fled,
Nor, till he reachâd Lyrnessus, turnâd his head.
Her lofty walls not long our progress stayâd;
Those, Pallas, Jove, and we, in ruins laid:
In Grecian chains her captive race were cast;
âTis true, the great Ãneas fled too fast.
Defrauded of my conquest once before,
What then I lost, the gods this day restore.
Go; while thou mayâst, avoid the threatenâd fate;
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late.â

To this Anchisesâ son: âSuch words employ
To one that fears thee, some unwarlike boy;
Such we disdain; the best may be defied
With mean reproaches, and unmanly pride;
Unworthy the high race from which we came
Proclaimâd so loudly by the voice of fame:
Each from illustrious fathers draws his line;
Each goddess-born; half human, half divine.
Thetisâ this day, or Venusâ offspring dies,
And tears shall trickle from celestial eyes:
For when two heroes, thus derived, contend,
âTis not in words the glorious strife can end.
If yet thou further seek to learn my birth
(A tale resounded through the spacious earth)
Hear how the glorious origin we prove
From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove:
Dardaniaâs walls he raised; for Ilion, then,
(The city since of many-languaged men,)
Was not. The natives were content to till
The shady foot of Idaâs fountful hill.[264]
From Dardanus great Erichthonius springs,
The richest, once, of Asiaâs wealthy kings;
Three thousand mares his spacious pastures bred,
Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed.
Boreas, enamourâd of the sprightly train,
Concealâd his godhead in a flowing mane,
With voice dissembled to his loves he neighâd,
And coursed the dappled beauties oâer the mead:
Hence sprung twelve others of unrivallâd kind,
Swift as their mother mares, and father wind.
These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain,
Nor plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain;
And when along the level seas they flew,[265]
Scarce on the surface curlâd the briny dew.
Such Erichthonius was: from him there came
The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name.
Three sons renownâd adornâd his nuptial bed,
Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed:
The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair,
Whom heaven, enamourâd, snatchâd to upper air,
To bear the cup of Jove (ethereal guest,
The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast).
The two remaining sons the line divide:
First rose Laomedon from Ilusâ side;
From him Tithonus, now in cares grown old,
And Priam, blessâd with Hector, brave and bold;
Clytius and Lampus, ever-honourâd pair;
And Hicetaon, thunderbolt of war.
From great Assaracus sprang Capys, he
Begat Anchises, and Anchises me.
Such is our race: âtis fortune gives us birth,
But Jove alone endues the soul with worth:
He, source of power and might! with boundless sway,
All human courage gives, or takes away.
Long in the field of words we may contend,
Reproach is infinite, and knows no end,
Armâd or with truth or falsehood, right or wrong;
So voluble a weapon is the tongue;
Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail,
For every man has equal strength to rail:
Women alone, when in the streets they jar,
Perhaps excel us in this wordy war;
Like us they stand, encompassâd with the crowd,
And vent their anger impotent and loud.
Cease thenâOur business in the field of fight
Is not to question, but to prove our might.
To all those insults thou hast offerâd here,
Receive this answer: âtis my flying spear.â

He spoke. With all his force the javelin flung,
Fixâd deep, and loudly in the buckler rung.
Far on his outstretchâd arm, Pelides held
(To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful shield,
That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fear
Saw, ere it fell, the immeasurable spear.
His fears were vain; impenetrable charms
Secured the temper of the ethereal arms.
Through two strong plates the point its passage held,
But stoppâd, and rested, by the third repellâd.
Five plates of various metal, various mould,
Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold,
Of tin each inward, and the middle gold:
There stuck the lance. Then rising ere he threw,
The forceful spear of great Achilles flew,
And pierced the Dardan shieldâs extremest bound,
Where the shrill brass returnâd a sharper sound:
Through the thin verge the Pelean weapon glides,
And the slight covering of expanded hides.
Ãneas his contracted body bends,
And oâer him high the riven targe extends,
Sees, through its parting plates, the upper air,
And at his back perceives the quivering spear:
A fate so near him, chills his soul with fright;
And swims before his eyes the many-colourâd light.
Achilles, rushing in with dreadful cries,
Draws his broad blade, and at Ãneas flies:
Ãneas rousing as the foe came on,
With force collected, heaves a mighty stone:
A mass enormous! which in modern days
No two of earthâs degenerate sons could raise.
But oceanâs god, whose earthquakes rock the ground
Saw the distress, and moved the powers around:

âLo! on the brink of fate Ãneas stands,
An instant victim to Achillesâ hands;
By PhÅbus urged; but PhÅbus has bestowâd
His aid in vain: the man oâerpowers the god.
And can ye see this righteous chief atone
With guiltless blood for vices not his own?
To all the gods his constant vows were paid;
Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our aid.
Fate wills not this; nor thus can Jove resign
The future father of the Dardan line:[266]
The first great ancestor obtainâd his grace,
And still his love descends on all the race:
For Priam now, and Priamâs faithless kind,
At length are odious to the all-seeing mind;
On great Ãneas shall devolve the reign,
And sons succeeding sons the lasting line sustain.â

The great earth-shaker thus: to whom replies
The imperial goddess with the radiant eyes:
âGood as he is, to immolate or spare
The Dardan prince, O Neptune! be thy care;
Pallas and I, by all that gods can bind,
Have sworn destruction to the Trojan kind;
Not even an instant to protract their fate,
Or save one member of the sinking state;
Till her last flame be quenchâd with her last gore,
And even her crumbling ruins are no more.â

The king of ocean to the fight descends,
Through all the whistling darts his course he bends,
Swift interposed between the warrior flies,
And casts thick darkness oâer Achillesâ eyes.[267]
From great Ãneasâ shield the spear he drew,
And at his masterâs feet the weapon threw.
That done, with force divine he snatchâd on high
The Dardan prince, and bore him through the sky,
Smooth-gliding without step, above the heads
Of warring heroes, and of bounding steeds:
Till at the battleâs utmost verge they light,
Where the slow Caucans close the rear of fight.
The godhead there (his heavenly form confessâd)
With words like these the panting chief addressâd:

âWhat power, O prince! with force inferior far,
Urged thee to meet Achillesâ arm in war?
Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom,
Defrauding fate of all thy fame to come.
But when the day decreed (for come it must)
Shall lay this dreadful hero in the dust,
Let then the furies of that arm be known,
Secure no Grecian force transcends thy own.â

With that, he left him wondering as he lay,
Then from Achilles chased the mist away:
Sudden, returning with a stream of light,
The scene of war came rushing on his sight.
Then thus, amazed; âWhat wonders strike my mind!
My spear, that parted on the wings of wind,
Laid here before me! and the Dardan lord,
That fell this instant, vanishâd from my sword!
I thought alone with mortals to contend,
But powers celestial sure this foe defend.
Great as he is, our arms he scarce will try,
Content for once, with all his gods, to fly.
Now then let others bleed.â This said, aloud
He vents his fury and inflames the crowd:
âO Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms)
Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms!
âTis not in me, though favourâd by the sky,
To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly:
No god can singly such a host engage,
Not Mars himself, nor great Minervaâs rage.
But whatsoeâer Achilles can inspire,
Whateâer of active force, or acting fire;
Whateâer this heart can prompt, or hand obey;
All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.
Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear,
And thin the squadrons with my single spear.â

He said: nor less elate with martial joy,
The godlike Hector warmâd the troops of Troy:
âTrojans, to war! Think, Hector leads you on;
Nor dread the vaunts of Peleusâ haughty son.
Deeds must decide our fate. Eâen these with words
Insult the brave, who tremble at their swords:
The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven defies,
But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies.
Nor from yon boaster shall your chief retire,
Not though his heart were steel, his hands were fire;
That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand,
And brave that vengeful heart, that dreadful hand.â

Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said;
A wood of lances rises round his head,
Clamours on clamours tempest all the air,
They join, they throng, they thicken to the war.
But PhÅbus warns him from high heaven to shun
The single fight with Thetisâ godlike son;
More safe to combat in the mingled band,
Nor tempt too near the terrors of his hand.
He hears, obedient to the god of light,
And, plunged within the ranks, awaits the fight.

Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the skies,
On Troyâs whole force with boundless fury flies.
First falls Iphytion, at his armyâs head;
Brave was the chief, and brave the host he led;
From great Otrynteus he derived his blood,
His mother was a Nais, of the flood;
Beneath the shades of Tmolus, crownâd with snow,
From Hydeâs walls he ruled the lands below.
Fierce as he springs, the sword his head divides:
The parted visage falls on equal sides:
With loud-resounding arms he strikes the plain;
While thus Achilles glories oâer the slain:

âLie there, Otryntides! the Trojan earth
Receives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy birth;
Those beauteous fields where Hyllusâ waves are rollâd,
And plenteous Hermus swells with tides of gold,
Are thine no more.ââThe insulting hero said,
And left him sleeping in eternal shade.
The rolling wheels of Greece the body tore,
And dashâd their axles with no vulgar gore.

Demoleon next, Antenorâs offspring, laid
Breathless in dust, the price of rashness paid.
The impatient steel with full-descending sway
Forced through his brazen helm its furious way,
Resistless drove the batterâd skull before,
And dashâd and mingled all the brains with gore.
This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright,
Deserts his chariot for a swifter flight:
The lance arrests him: an ignoble wound
The panting Trojan rivets to the ground.
He groans away his soul: not louder roars,
At Neptuneâs shrine on Heliceâs high shores,
The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round,
And ocean listens to the grateful sound.
Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,[268]
The youngest hope of Priamâs stooping age:
(Whose feet for swiftness in the race surpassâd:)
Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last.
To the forbidden field he takes his flight,
In the first folly of a youthful knight,
To vaunt his swiftness wheels around the plain,
But vaunts not long, with all his swiftness slain:
Struck where the crossing belts unite behind,
And golden rings the double back-plate joinâd
Forth through the navel burst the thrilling steel;
And on his knees with piercing shrieks he fell;
The rushing entrails pourâd upon the ground
His hands collect; and darkness wraps him round.
When Hector viewâd, all ghastly in his gore,
Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore,
A cloud of sorrow overcast his sight,
His soul no longer brookâd the distant fight:
Full in Achillesâ dreadful front he came,
And shook his javelin like a waving flame.
The son of Peleus sees, with joy possessâd,
His heart high-bounding in his rising breast.
âAnd, lo! the man on whom black fates attend;
The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend!
No more shall Hectorâs and Pelidesâ spear
Turn from each other in the walks of war.ââ
Then with revengeful eyes he scannâd him oâer:
âCome, and receive thy fate!â He spake no more.

Hector, undaunted, thus: âSuch words employ
To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike boy:
Such we could give, defying and defied,
Mean intercourse of obloquy and pride!
I know thy force to mine superior far;
But heaven alone confers success in war:
Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dart,
And give it entrance in a braver heart.â

Then parts the lance: but Pallasâ heavenly breath
Far from Achilles wafts the winged death:
The bidden dart again to Hector flies,
And at the feet of its great master lies.
Achilles closes with his hated foe,
His heart and eyes with flaming fury glow:
But present to his aid, Apollo shrouds
The favourâd hero in a veil of clouds.
Thrice struck Pelides with indignant heart,
Thrice in impassive air he plunged the dart;
The spear a fourth time buried in the cloud.
He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud:

âWretch! thou hast âscaped again; once more thy flight
Has saved thee, and the partial god of light.
But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand,
If any power assist Achillesâ hand.
Fly then inglorious! but thy flight this day
Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay.â

With that, he gluts his rage on numbers slain:
Then Dryops tumbled to the ensanguined plain,
Pierced through the neck: he left him panting there,
And stoppâd Demuchus, great Philetorâs heir.
Gigantic chief! deep gashâd the enormous blade,
And for the soul an ample passage made.
Laoganus and Dardanus expire,
The valiant sons of an unhappy sire;
Both in one instant from the chariot hurlâd,
Sunk in one instant to the nether world:
This difference only their sad fates afford
That one the spear destroyâd, and one the sword.

Nor less unpitied, young Alastor bleeds;
In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pleads;
In vain he begs thee, with a suppliantâs moan,
To spare a form, an age so like thy own!
Unhappy boy! no prayer, no moving art,
Eâer bent that fierce, inexorable heart!
While yet he trembled at his knees, and cried,
The ruthless falchion oped his tender side;
The panting liver pours a flood of gore
That drowns his bosom till he pants no more.

Through Muliusâ head then drove the impetuous spear:
The warrior falls, transfixâd from ear to ear.
Thy life, Echeclus! next the sword bereaves,
Deep though the front the ponderous falchion cleaves;
Warmâd in the brain the smoking weapon lies,
The purple death comes floating oâer his eyes.
Then brave Deucalion died: the dart was flung
Where the knit nerves the pliant elbow strung;
He droppâd his arm, an unassisting weight,
And stood all impotent, expecting fate:
Full on his neck the falling falchion sped,
From his broad shoulders hewâd his crested head:
Forth from the bone the spinal marrow flies,
And, sunk in dust, the corpse extended lies.
Rhigmas, whose race from fruitful Thracia came,
(The son of Pierus, an illustrious name,)
Succeeds to fate: the spear his belly rends;
Prone from his car the thundering chief descends.
The squire, who saw expiring on the ground
His prostrate master, reinâd the steeds around;
His back, scarce turnâd, the Pelian javelin gored,
And stretchâd the servant oâer his dying lord.
As when a flame the winding valley fills,
And runs on crackling shrubs between the hills;
Then oâer the stubble up the mountain flies,
Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies,
This way and that, the spreading torrent roars:
So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores;
Around him wide, immense destruction pours
And earth is deluged with the sanguine showers,
As with autumnal harvests coverâd oâer,
And thick bestrewn, lies Ceresâ sacred floor;
When round and round, with never-wearied pain,
The trampling steers beat out the unnumberâd grain:
So the fierce coursers, as the chariot rolls,
Tread down whole ranks, and crush out heroesâ souls,
Dashâd from their hoofs while oâer the dead they fly,
Black, bloody drops the smoking chariot dye:
The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore;
And thick the groaning axles droppâd with gore.
High oâer the scene of death Achilles stood,
All grim with dust, all horrible in blood:
Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame;
Such is the lust of never-dying fame!


[Illustration: ] CENTAUR




BOOK XXI.


ARGUMENT.


THE BATTLE IN THE RIVER SCAMANDER.[269]


The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town, others to the
river Scamander: he falls upon the latter with great slaughter: takes
twelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; and
kills Lycaon and Asteropeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves:
Neptune and Pallas assist the hero: Simois joins Scamander: at length
Vulcan, by the instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river. This
combat ended, the other gods engage each other. Meanwhile Achilles
continues the slaughter, drives the rest into Troy: Agenor only makes a
stand, and is conveyed away in a cloud by Apollo; who (to delude
Achilles) takes upon him Agenorâs shape, and while he pursues him in
that disguise, gives the Trojans an opportunity of retiring into their
city.
    The same day continues. The scene is on the banks and in the stream
    of Scamander.


And now to Xanthusâ gliding stream they drove,
Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove.
The river here divides the flying train,
Part to the town fly diverse oâer the plain,
Where late their troops triumphant bore the fight,
Now chased, and trembling in ignoble flight:
(These with a gathered mist Saturnia shrouds,
And rolls behind the rout a heap of clouds:)
Part plunge into the stream: old Xanthus roars,
The flashing billows beat the whitenâd shores:
With cries promiscuous all the banks resound,
And here, and there, in eddies whirling round,
The flouncing steeds and shrieking warriors drownâd.
As the scorchâd locusts from their fields retire,
While fast behind them runs the blaze of fire;
Driven from the land before the smoky cloud,
The clustering legions rush into the flood:
So, plunged in Xanthus by Achillesâ force,
Roars the resounding surge with men and horse.
His bloody lance the hero casts aside,
(Which spreading tamarisks on the margin hide,)
Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves,
Armâd with his sword, high brandishâd oâer the waves:
Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round,
Deep groanâd the waters with the dying sound;
Repeated wounds the reddening river dyed,
And the warm purple circled on the tide.
Swift through the foamy flood the Trojans fly,
And close in rocks or winding caverns lie:
So the huge dolphin tempesting the main,
In shoals before him fly the scaly train,
Confusedly heapâd they seek their inmost caves,
Or pant and heave beneath the floating waves.
Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band
Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land;
With their rich belts their captive arms restrains
(Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).
These his attendants to the ships conveyâd,
Sad victims destined to Patroclusâ shade;

Then, as once more he plunged amid the flood,
The young Lycaon in his passage stood;
The son of Priam; whom the heroâs hand
But late made captive in his fatherâs land
(As from a sycamore, his sounding steel
Loppâd the green arms to spoke a chariot wheel)
To Lemnosâ isle he sold the royal slave,
Where Jasonâs son the price demanded gave;
But kind Eetion, touching on the shore,
The ransomâd prince to fair Arisbe bore.
Ten days were past, since in his fatherâs reign
He felt the sweets of liberty again;
The next, that god whom men in vain withstand
Gives the same youth to the same conquering hand
Now never to return! and doomâd to go
A sadder journey to the shades below.
His well-known face when great Achilles eyed,
(The helm and visor he had cast aside
With wild affright, and droppâd upon the field
His useless lance and unavailing shield,)
As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled,
And knockâd his faltering knees, the hero said:
âYe mighty gods! what wonders strike my view!
Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?
Sure I shall see yon heaps of Trojans killâd
Rise from the shades, and brave me on the field;
As now the captive, whom so late I bound
And sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan ground!
Not him the seaâs unmeasured deeps detain,
That bar such numbers from their native plain;
Lo! he returns. Try, then, my flying spear!
Try, if the grave can hold the wanderer;
If earth, at length this active prince can seize,
Earth, whose strong grasp has held down Hercules.â

Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with fears
Approachâd, and sought his knees with suppliant tears
Loth as he was to yield his youthful breath,
And his soul shivering at the approach of death.
Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound;
He kissâd his feet, extended on the ground:
And while, above, the spear suspended stood,
Longing to dip its thirsty point in blood,
One hand embraced them close, one stoppâd the dart,
While thus these melting words attempt his heart:

âThy well-known captive, great Achilles! see,
Once more Lycaon trembles at thy knee.
Some pity to a suppliantâs name afford,
Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board;
Whom late thy conquering arm to Lemnos bore,
Far from his father, friends, and native shore;
A hundred oxen were his price that day,
Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay.
Scarce respited from woes I yet appear,
And scarce twelve morning suns have seen me here;
Lo! Jove again submits me to thy hands,
Again, her victim cruel Fate demands!
I sprang from Priam, and Laothoe fair,
(Old Altesâ daughter, and Lelegiaâs heir;
Who held in Pedasus his famed abode,
And ruled the fields where silver Satnio flowâd,)
Two sons (alas! unhappy sons) she bore;
For ah! one spear shall drink each brotherâs gore,
And I succeed to slaughterâd Polydore.
How from that arm of terror shall I fly?
Some demon urges! âtis my doom to die!
If ever yet soft pity touchâd thy mind,
Ah! think not me too much of Hectorâs kind!
Not the same mother gave thy suppliant breath,
With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclusâ death.â

These words, attended with a shower of tears,
The youth addressâd to unrelenting ears:
âTalk not of life, or ransom (he replies):
Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies:
In vain a single Trojan sues for grace;
But least, the sons of Priamâs hateful race.
Die then, my friend! what boots it to deplore?
The great, the good Patroclus is no more!
He, far thy better, was foredoomâd to die,
And thou, dost thou bewail mortality?
Seest thou not me, whom natureâs gifts adorn,
Sprung from a hero, from a goddess born?
The day shall come (which nothing can avert)
When by the spear, the arrow, or the dart,
By night, or day, by force, or by design,
Impending death and certain fate are mine!
Die then,ââHe said; and as the word he spoke,
The fainting stripling sank before the stroke:
His hand forgot its grasp, and left the spear,
While all his trembling frame confessâd his fear:
Sudden, Achilles his broad sword displayâd,
And buried in his neck the reeking blade.
Prone fell the youth; and panting on the land,
The gushing purple dyed the thirsty sand.
The victor to the stream the carcase gave,
And thus insults him, floating on the wave:

âLie there, Lycaon! let the fish surround
Thy bloated corpse, and suck thy gory wound:
There no sad mother shall thy funerals weep,
But swift Scamander roll thee to the deep,
Whose every wave some watery monster brings,
To feast unpunishâd on the fat of kings.
So perish Troy, and all the Trojan line!
Such ruin theirs, and such compassion mine.
What boots ye now Scamanderâs worshippâd stream,
His earthly honours, and immortal name?
In vain your immolated bulls are slain,
Your living coursers glut his gulfs in vain!
Thus he rewards you, with this bitter fate;
Thus, till the Grecian vengeance is complete:
Thus is atoned Patroclusâ honourâd shade,
And the short absence of Achilles paid.â

These boastful words provoked the raging god;
With fury swells the violated flood.
What means divine may yet the power employ
To check Achilles, and to rescue Troy?
Meanwhile the hero springs in arms, to dare
The great Asteropeus to mortal war;
The son of Pelagon, whose lofty line
Flows from the source of Axius, stream divine!
(Fair Peribaeaâs love the god had crownâd,
With all his refluent waters circled round:)
On him Achilles rushâd; he fearless stood,
And shook two spears, advancing from the flood;
The flood impellâd him, on Pelidesâ head
To avenge his waters choked with heaps of dead.
Near as they drew, Achilles thus began:

âWhat art thou, boldest of the race of man?
Who, or from whence? Unhappy is the sire
Whose son encounters our resistless ire.â

âO son of Peleus! what avails to trace
(Replied the warrior) our illustrious race?
From rich Paeoniaâs valleys I command,
Armâd with protended spears, my native band;
Now shines the tenth bright morning since I came
In aid of Ilion to the fields of fame:
Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring rills,
And wide around the floated region fills,
Begot my sire, whose spear much glory won:
Now lift thy arm, and try that heroâs son!â

Threatening he said: the hostile chiefs advance;
At once Asteropeus discharged each lance,
(For both his dexterous hands the lance could wield,)
One struck, but pierced not, the Vulcanian shield;
One razed Achillesâ hand; the spouting blood
Spun forth; in earth the fastenâd weapon stood.
Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies:
Its erring fury hissâd along the skies;
Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear,
Even to the middle earth; and quiverâd there.
Then from his side the sword Pelides drew,
And on his foe with double fury flew.
The foe thrice tuggâd, and shook the rooted wood;
Repulsive of his might the weapon stood:
The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain;
Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain;
His belly openâd with a ghastly wound,
The reeking entrails pour upon the ground.
Beneath the heroâs feet he panting lies,
And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies;
While the proud victor thus triumphing said,
His radiant armour tearing from the dead:

âSo ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove,
Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove!
Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line?
But great Saturnius is the source of mine.
How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny?
Of Peleus, Ãacus, and Jove, am I.
The race of these superior far to those,
As he that thunders to the stream that flows.
What rivers can, Scamander might have shown;
But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.
Even Achelous might contend in vain,
And all the roaring billows of the main.
The eternal ocean, from whose fountains flow
The seas, the rivers, and the springs below,
The thundering voice of Jove abhors to hear,
And in his deep abysses shakes with fear.â

He said: then from the bank his javelin tore,
And left the breathless warrior in his gore.
The floating tides the bloody carcase lave,
And beat against it, wave succeeding wave;
Till, rollâd between the banks, it lies the food
Of curling eels, and fishes of the flood.
All scatterâd round the stream (their mightiest slain)
The amazed Paeonians scour along the plain;
He vents his fury on the flying crew,
Thrasius, Astyplus, and Mnesus slew;
Mydon, Thersilochus, with Ãnius, fell;
And numbers more his lance had plunged to hell,
But from the bottom of his gulfs profound
Scamander spoke; the shores returnâd the sound.

âO first of mortals! (for the gods are thine)
In valour matchless, and in force divine!
If Jove have given thee every Trojan head,
âTis not on me thy rage should heap the dead.
See! my choked streams no more their course can keep,
Nor roll their wonted tribute to the deep.
Turn then, impetuous! from our injured flood;
Content, thy slaughters could amaze a god.â

In human form, confessâd before his eyes,
The river thus; and thus the chief replies:
âO sacred stream! thy word we shall obey;
But not till Troy the destined vengeance pay,
Not till within her towers the perjured train
Shall pant, and tremble at our arms again;
Not till proud Hector, guardian of her wall,
Or stain this lance, or see Achilles fall.â

He said; and drove with fury on the foe.
Then to the godhead of the silver bow
The yellow flood began: âO son of Jove!
Was not the mandate of the sire above
Full and express, that PhÅbus should employ
His sacred arrows in defence of Troy,
And make her conquer, till Hyperionâs fall
In awful darkness hide the face of all?â

He spoke in vainâThe chief without dismay
Ploughs through the boiling surge his desperate way.
Then rising in his rage above the shores,
From all his deep the bellowing river roars,
Huge heaps of slain disgorges on the coast,
And round the banks the ghastly dead are tossâd.
While all before, the billows ranged on high,
(A watery bulwark,) screen the bands who fly.
Now bursting on his head with thundering sound,
The falling deluge whelms the hero round:
His loaded shield bends to the rushing tide;
His feet, upborne, scarce the strong flood divide,
Sliddering, and staggering. On the border stood
A spreading elm, that overhung the flood;
He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay;
The plant uprooted to his weight gave way.[270]
Heaving the bank, and undermining all;
Loud flash the waters to the rushing fall
Of the thick foliage. The large trunk displayâd
Bridged the rough flood across: the hero stayâd
On this his weight, and raised upon his hand,
Leapâd from the channel, and regainâd the land.
Then blackenâd the wild waves: the murmur rose:
The god pursues, a huger billow throws,
And bursts the bank, ambitious to destroy
The man whose fury is the fate of Troy.
He like the warlike eagle speeds his pace
(Swiftest and strongest of the aerial race);
Far as a spear can fly, Achilles springs;
At every bound his clanging armour rings:
Now here, now there, he turns on every side,
And winds his course before the following tide;
The waves flow after, wheresoeâer he wheels,
And gather fast, and murmur at his heels.
So when a peasant to his garden brings
Soft rills of water from the bubbling springs,
And calls the floods from high, to bless his bowers,
And feed with pregnant streams the plants and flowers:
Soon as he clears whateâer their passage stayâd,
And marks the future current with his spade,
Swift oâer the rolling pebbles, down the hills,
Louder and louder purl the falling rills;
Before him scattering, they prevent his pains,
And shine in mazy wanderings oâer the plains.

Still flies Achilles, but before his eyes
Still swift Scamander rolls whereâer he flies:
Not all his speed escapes the rapid floods;
The first of men, but not a match for gods.
Oft as he turnâd the torrent to oppose,
And bravely try if all the powers were foes;
So oft the surge, in watery mountains spread,
Beats on his back, or bursts upon his head.
Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he braves,
And still indignant bounds above the waves.
Tired by the tides, his knees relax with toil;
Washâd from beneath him slides the slimy soil;
When thus (his eyes on heavenâs expansion thrown)
Forth bursts the hero with an angry groan:

âIs there no god Achilles to befriend,
No power to avert his miserable end?
Prevent, O Jove! this ignominious date,[271]
And make my future life the sport of fate.
Of all heavenâs oracles believed in vain,
But most of Thetis must her son complain;
By PhÅbusâ darts she prophesied my fall,
In glorious arms before the Trojan wall.
Oh! had I died in fields of battle warm,
Stretchâd like a hero, by a heroâs arm!
Might Hectorâs spear this dauntless bosom rend,
And my swift soul oâertake my slaughterâd friend.
Ah no! Achilles meets a shameful fate,
Oh how unworthy of the brave and great!
Like some vile swain, whom on a rainy day,
Crossing a ford, the torrent sweeps away,
An unregarded carcase to the sea.â

Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief,
And thus in human form addressâd the chief:
The power of ocean first: âForbear thy fear,
O son of Peleus! Lo, thy gods appear!
Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid,
Propitious Neptune, and the blue-eyed maid.
Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave
âTis not thy fate to glut his angry wave.
But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend,
Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all
Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall:
Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance,
And Hectorâs blood shall smoke upon thy lance.
Thine is the glory doomâd.â Thus spake the gods:
Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.

Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impellâd,
He springs impetuous, and invades the field:
Oâer all the expanded plain the waters spread;
Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead,
Floating âmidst scatterâd arms; while casques of gold
And turnâd-up bucklers glitterâd as they rollâd.
High oâer the surging tide, by leaps and bounds,
He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds.
Not a whole river stops the heroâs course,
While Pallas fills him with immortal force.
With equal rage, indignant Xanthus roars,
And lifts his billows, and oâerwhelms his shores.

Then thus to Simois! âHaste, my brother flood;
And check this mortal that controls a god;
Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight,
And Ilion tumble from her towery height.
Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar,
From all thy fountains swell thy watery store,
With broken rocks, and with a load of dead,
Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head.
Mark how resistless through the floods he goes,
And boldly bids the warring gods be foes!
But nor that force, nor form divine to sight,
Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite:
Whelmâd under our dark gulfs those arms shall lie,
That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan eye;
And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurlâd,
Immersed remain this terror of the world.
Such ponderous ruin shall confound the place,
No Greeks shall eâer his perishâd relics grace,
No hand his bones shall gather, or inhume;
These his cold rites, and this his watery tomb.â


[Illustration: ] ACHILLES CONTENDING WITH THE RIVERS


He said; and on the chief descends amain,
Increased with gore, and swelling with the slain.
Then, murmuring from his beds, he boils, he raves,
And a foam whitens on the purple waves:
At every step, before Achilles stood
The crimson surge, and deluged him with blood.
Fear touchâd the queen of heaven: she saw dismayâd,
She callâd aloud, and summonâd Vulcanâs aid.

âRise to the war! the insulting flood requires
Thy wasteful arm! assemble all thy fires!
While to their aid, by our command enjoinâd,
Rush the swift eastern and the western wind:
These from old ocean at my word shall blow,
Pour the red torrent on the watery foe,
Corses and arms to one bright ruin turn,
And hissing rivers to their bottoms burn.
Go, mighty in thy rage! display thy power,
Drink the whole flood, the crackling trees devour.
Scorch all the banks! and (till our voice reclaim)
Exert the unwearied furies of the flame!â

The power ignipotent her word obeys:
Wide oâer the plain he pours the boundless blaze;
At once consumes the dead, and dries the soil
And the shrunk waters in their channel boil.
As when autumnal Boreas sweeps the sky,
And instant blows the waterâd gardens dry:
So lookâd the field, so whitenâd was the ground,
While Vulcan breathed the fiery blast around.
Swift on the sedgy reeds the ruin preys;
Along the margin winds the running blaze:
The trees in flaming rows to ashes turn,
The flowering lotos and the tamarisk burn,
Broad elm, and cypress rising in a spire;
The watery willows hiss before the fire.
Now glow the waves, the fishes pant for breath,
The eels lie twisting in the pangs of death:
Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry,
Or, gasping, turn their bellies to the sky.
At length the river rearâd his languid head,
And thus, short-panting, to the god he said:

âOh Vulcan! oh! what power resists thy might?
I faint, I sink, unequal to the fightâ
I yieldâLet Ilion fall; if fate decreeâ
Ahâbend no more thy fiery arms on me!â

He ceased; wide conflagration blazing round;
The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.
As when the flames beneath a cauldron rise,[272]
To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice,
Amid the fierce embrace of circling fires
The waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires:
So boils the imprisonâd flood, forbid to flow,
And choked with vapours feels his bottom glow.
To Juno then, imperial queen of air,
The burning river sends his earnest prayer:

âAh why, Saturnia; must thy son engage
Me, only me, with all his wasteful rage?
On other gods his dreadful arm employ,
For mightier gods assert the cause of Troy.
Submissive I desist, if thou command;
But ah! withdraw this all-destroying hand.
Hear then my solemn oath, to yield to fate
Unaided Ilion, and her destined state,
Till Greece shall gird her with destructive flame,
And in one ruin sink the Trojan name.â

His warm entreaty touchâd Saturniaâs ear:
She bade the ignipotent his rage forbear,
Recall the flame, nor in a mortal cause
Infest a god: the obedient flame withdraws:
Again the branching streams begin to spread,
And soft remurmur in their wonted bed.

While these by Junoâs will the strife resign,
The warring gods in fierce contention join:
Rekindling rage each heavenly breast alarms:
With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms:
Heaven in loud thunder bids the trumpet sound;
And wide beneath them groans the rending ground.
Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries,
And views contending gods with careless eyes.
The power of battles lifts his brazen spear,
And first assaults the radiant queen of war:

âWhat moved thy madness, thus to disunite
Ethereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight?
What wonder this, when in thy frantic mood
Thou drovest a mortal to insult a god?
Thy impious hand Tydidesâ javelin bore,
And madly bathed it in celestial gore.â

He spoke, and smote the long-resounding shield,
Which bears Joveâs thunder on its dreadful field:
The adamantine aegis of her sire,
That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire.

Then heaved the goddess in her mighty hand
A stone, the limit of the neighbouring land,
There fixâd from eldest times; black, craggy, vast;
This at the heavenly homicide she cast.
Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size:
And seven broad acres covers as he lies.
The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound:
Loud oâer the fields his ringing arms resound:
The scornful dame her conquest views with smiles,
And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles:

âHast thou not yet, insatiate fury! known
How far Minervaâs force transcends thy own?
Juno, whom thou rebellious darest withstand,
Corrects thy folly thus by Pallasâ hand;
Thus meets thy broken faith with just disgrace,
And partial aid to Troyâs perfidious race.â

The goddess spoke, and turnâd her eyes away,
That, beaming round, diffused celestial day.
Joveâs Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land,
Lent to the wounded god her tender hand:
Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain,
And, proppâd on her fair arm, forsakes the plain.
This the bright empress of the heavens surveyâd,
And, scoffing, thus to warâs victorious maid:

âLo! what an aid on Marsâs side is seen!
The smilesâ and lovesâ unconquerable queen!
Mark with what insolence, in open view,
She moves: let Pallas, if she dares, pursue.â

Minerva smiling heard, the pair oâertook,
And slightly on her breast the wanton strook:
She, unresisting, fell (her spirits fled);
On earth together lay the lovers spread.
âAnd like these heroes be the fate of all
(Minerva cries) who guard the Trojan wall!
To Grecian gods such let the Phrygian be,
So dread, so fierce, as Venus is to me;
Then from the lowest stone shall Troy be moved.â
Thus she, and Juno with a smile approved.

Meantime, to mix in more than mortal fight,
The god of ocean dares the god of light.
âWhat sloth has seized us, when the fields around
Ring with conflicting powers, and heaven returns the sound:
Shall, ignominious, we with shame retire,
No deed performâd, to our Olympian sire?
Come, prove thy arm! for first the war to wage,
Suits not my greatness, or superior age:
Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan throne,
(Forgetful of my wrongs, and of thy own,)
And guard the race of proud Laomedon!
Hast thou forgot, how, at the monarchâs prayer,
We shared the lengthenâd labours of a year?
Troy walls I raised (for such were Joveâs commands),
And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands:
Thy task it was to feed the bellowing droves
Along fair Idaâs vales and pendant groves.
But when the circling seasons in their train
Brought back the grateful day that crownâd our pain,
With menace stern the fraudful king defied
Our latent godhead, and the prize denied:
Mad as he was, he threatenâd servile bands,
And doomâd us exiles far in barbarous lands.[273]
Incensed, we heavenward fled with swiftest wing,
And destined vengeance on the perjured king.
Dost thou, for this, afford proud Ilion grace,
And not, like us, infest the faithless race;
Like us, their present, future sons destroy,
And from its deep foundations heave their Troy?â

Apollo thus: âTo combat for mankind
Ill suits the wisdom of celestial mind;
For what is man? Calamitous by birth,
They owe their life and nourishment to earth;
Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crownâd,
Smile on the sun; now, wither on the ground.
To their own hands commit the frantic scene,
Nor mix immortals in a cause so mean.â

Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly fires,
And from the senior power submiss retires:
Him thus retreating, Artemis upbraids,
The quiverâd huntress of the sylvan shades:

âAnd is it thus the youthful PhÅbus flies,
And yields to oceanâs hoary sire the prize?
How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show
Of pointed arrows and the silver bow!
Now boast no more in yon celestial bower,
Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power.â

Silent he heard the queen of woods upbraid:
Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid:
But furious thus: âWhat insolence has driven
Thy pride to face the majesty of heaven?
What though by Jove the female plague designâd,
Fierce to the feeble race of womankind,
The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart;
Thy sexâs tyrant, with a tigerâs heart?
What though tremendous in the woodland chase
Thy certain arrows pierce the savage race?
How dares thy rashness on the powers divine
Employ those arms, or match thy force with mine?
Learn hence, no more unequal war to wageââ
She said, and seized her wrists with eager rage;
These in her left hand lockâd, her right untied
The bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride.
About her temples flies the busy bow;
Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow;
The scattering arrows, rattling from the case,
Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.
Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies,
And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes:
So, when the falcon wings her way above,
To the cleft cavern speeds the gentle dove;
(Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats,
Yet still her heart against the marble beats.

To her Latona hastes with tender care;
Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the war:
âHow shall I face the dame, who gives delight
To him whose thunders blacken heaven with night?
Go, matchless goddess! triumph in the skies,
And boast my conquest, while I yield the prize.â

He spoke; and passâd: Latona, stooping low,
Collects the scatterâd shafts and fallen bow,
That, glittering on the dust, lay here and there
Dishonourâd relics of Dianaâs war:
Then swift pursued her to her blest abode,
Where, all confused, she sought the sovereign god;
Weeping, she graspâd his knees: the ambrosial vest
Shook with her sighs, and panted on her breast.

The sire superior smiled, and bade her show
What heavenly hand had caused his daughterâs woe?
Abashâd, she names his own imperial spouse;
And the pale crescent fades upon her brows.

Thus they above: while, swiftly gliding down,
Apollo enters Ilionâs sacred town;
The guardian-god now trembled for her wall,
And fearâd the Greeks, though fate forbade her fall.
Back to Olympus, from the warâs alarms,
Return the shining bands of gods in arms;
Some proud in triumph, some with rage on fire;
And take their thrones around the ethereal sire.

Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds,
Oâer slaughterâd heroes, and oâer rolling steeds.
As when avenging flames with fury driven
On guilty towns exert the wrath of heaven;
The pale inhabitants, some fall, some fly;
And the red vapours purple all the sky:
So raged Achilles: death and dire dismay,
And toils, and terrors, fillâd the dreadful day.

High on a turret hoary Priam stands,
And marks the waste of his destructive hands;
Views, from his arm, the Trojansâ scatterâd flight,
And the near hero rising on his sight!
No stop, no check, no aid! With feeble pace,
And settled sorrow on his aged face,
Fast as he could, he sighing quits the walls;
And thus descending, on the guards he calls:

âYou to whose care our city-gates belong,
Set wide your portals to the flying throng:
For lo! he comes, with unresisted sway;
He comes, and desolation marks his way!
But when within the walls our troops take breath,
Lock fast the brazen bars, and shut out death.â
Thus charged the reverend monarch: wide were flung
The opening folds; the sounding hinges rung.
PhÅbus rushâd forth, the flying bands to meet;
Struck slaughter back, and coverâd the retreat,
On heaps the Trojans crowd to gain the gate,
And gladsome see their last escape from fate.
Thither, all parchâd with thirst, a heartless train,
Hoary with dust, they beat the hollow plain:
And gasping, panting, fainting, labour on
With heavier strides, that lengthen toward the town.
Enraged Achilles follows with his spear;
Wild with revenge, insatiable of war.

Then had the Greeks eternal praise acquired,
And Troy inglorious to her walls retired;
But he, the god who darts ethereal flame,
Shot down to save her, and redeem her fame:
To young Agenor force divine he gave;
(Antenorâs offspring, haughty, bold, and brave;)
In aid of him, beside the beech he sate,
And wrapt in clouds, restrainâd the hand of fate.
When now the generous youth Achilles spies,
Thick beats his heart, the troubled motions rise.
(So, ere a storm, the waters heave and roll.)
He stops, and questions thus his mighty soul;

âWhat, shall I fly this terror of the plain!
Like others fly, and be like others slain?
Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same road
Yon line of slaughterâd Trojans lately trod.
No: with the common heap I scorn to fallâ
What if they passâd me to the Trojan wall,
While I decline to yonder path, that leads
To Idaâs forests and surrounding shades?
So may I reach, concealâd, the cooling flood,
From my tired body wash the dirt and blood,
As soon as night her dusky veil extends,
Return in safety to my Trojan friends.
What if?âBut wherefore all this vain debate?
Stand I to doubt, within the reach of fate?
Even now perhaps, ere yet I turn the wall,
The fierce Achilles sees me, and I fall:
Such is his swiftness, âtis in vain to fly,
And such his valour, that who stands must die.
Howeâer âtis better, fighting for the state,
Here, and in public view, to meet my fate.
Yet sure he too is mortal; he may feel
(Like all the sons of earth) the force of steel.
One only soul informs that dreadful frame:
And Joveâs sole favour gives him all his fame.â

He said, and stood, collected, in his might;
And all his beating bosom claimâd the fight.
So from some deep-grown wood a panther starts,
Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts:
Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the sounds
Of shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds;
Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain;
And the barbâd javelin stings his breast in vain:
On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies;
And tears his hunter, or beneath him dies.
Not less resolved, Antenorâs valiant heir
Confronts Achilles, and awaits the war,
Disdainful of retreat: high held before,
His shield (a broad circumference) he bore;
Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw
The lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe:

âHow proud Achilles glories in his fame!
And hopes this day to sink the Trojan name
Beneath her ruins! Know, that hope is vain;
A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.
Parents and children our just arms employ,
And strong and many are the sons of Troy.
Great as thou art, even thou mayâst stain with gore
These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore.â

He said: with matchless force the javelin flung
Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung
Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms
He stands impassive in the ethereal arms.
Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe,
His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow:
But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds
The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds.
Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view,
Dismissâd with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape,
Assumes Agenorâs habit, voice and shape,
Flies from the furious chief in this disguise;
The furious chief still follows where he flies.
Now oâer the fields they stretch with lengthenâd strides,
Now urge the course where swift Scamander glides:
The god, now distant scarce a stride before,
Tempts his pursuit, and wheels about the shore;
While all the flying troops their speed employ,
And pour on heaps into the walls of Troy:
No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell,
Who âscaped by flight, or who by battle fell.
âTwas tumult all, and violence of flight;
And sudden joy confused, and mixâd affright.
Pale Troy against Achilles shuts her gate:
And nations breathe, deliverâd from their fate.




BOOK XXII.


ARGUMENT.


THE DEATH OF HECTOR.


The Trojans being safe within the walls, Hector only stays to oppose
Achilles. Priam is struck at his approach, and tries to persuade his
son to re-enter the town. Hecuba joins her entreaties, but in vain.
Hector consults within himself what measures to take; but at the
advance of Achilles, his resolution fails him, and he flies. Achilles
pursues him thrice round the walls of Troy. The gods debate concerning
the fate of Hector; at length Minerva descends to the aid of Achilles.
She deludes Hector in the shape of Deiphobus; he stands the combat, and
is slain. Achilles drags the dead body at his chariot in the sight of
Priam and Hecuba. Their lamentations, tears, and despair. Their cries
reach the ears of Andromache, who, ignorant of this, was retired into
the inner part of the palace: she mounts up to the walls, and beholds
her dead husband. She swoons at the spectacle. Her excess of grief and
lamentation.
    The thirtieth day still continues. The scene lies under the walls,
    and on the battlements of Troy.


Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic fear,
The herded Ilians rush like driven deer:
There safe they wipe the briny drops away,
And drown in bowls the labours of the day.
Close to the walls, advancing oâer the fields
Beneath one roof of well-compacted shields,
March, bending on, the Greeksâ embodied powers,
Far stretching in the shade of Trojan towers.
Great Hector singly stayâd: chainâd down by fate
There fixâd he stood before the Scaean gate;
Still his bold arms determined to employ,
The guardian still of long-defended Troy.

Apollo now to tired Achilles turns:
(The power confessâd in all his glory burns:)
âAnd what (he cries) has Peleusâ son in view,
With mortal speed a godhead to pursue?
For not to thee to know the gods is given,
Unskillâd to trace the latent marks of heaven.
What boots thee now, that Troy forsook the plain?
Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain:
Safe in their walls are now her troops bestowâd,
While here thy frantic rage attacks a god.â

The chief incensedââToo partial god of day!
To check my conquests in the middle way:
How few in Ilion else had refuge found!
What gasping numbers now had bit the ground!
Thou robbâst me of a glory justly mine,
Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine:
Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain,
To cheat a mortal who repines in vain.â

Then to the city, terrible and strong,
With high and haughty steps he towerâd along,
So the proud courser, victor of the prize,
To the near goal with double ardour flies.
Him, as he blazing shot across the field,
The careful eyes of Priam first beheld.
Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,[274]
Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night,
Orionâs dog (the year when autumn weighs),
And oâer the feebler stars exerts his rays;
Terrific glory! for his burning breath
Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
So flamed his fiery mail. Then wept the sage:
He strikes his reverend head, now white with age;
He lifts his witherâd arms; obtests the skies;
He calls his much-loved son with feeble cries:
The son, resolved Achillesâ force to dare,
Full at the Scaean gates expects the war;
While the sad father on the rampart stands,
And thus adjures him with extended hands:

âAh stay not, stay not! guardless and alone;
Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest son!
Methinks already I behold thee slain,
And stretchâd beneath that fury of the plain.
Implacable Achilles! mightâst thou be
To all the gods no dearer than to me!
Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore,
And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.
How many valiant sons I late enjoyâd,
Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroyâd:
Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant isles
To shameful bondage, and unworthy toils.
Two, while I speak, my eyes in vain explore,
Two from one mother sprung, my Polydore,
And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!
Oh! if in yonder hostile camp they live,
What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give!
(Their grandsireâs wealth, by right of birth their own,
Consignâd his daughter with Lelegiaâs throne:)
But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost,
All pale they wander on the Stygian coast;
What sorrows then must their sad mother know,
What anguish I? unutterable woe!
Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me,
Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee.
Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall;
And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so brave
Neglect that thought, thy dearer glory save.
Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs;
While yet thy father feels the woes he bears,
Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage
(All trembling on the verge of helpless age)
Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
The bitter dregs of fortuneâs cup to drain:
To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes,
And number all his days by miseries!
My heroes slain, my bridal bed oâerturnâd,
My daughters ravishâd, and my city burnâd,
My bleeding infants dashâd against the floor;
These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate,
The last sad relic of my ruinâd state,
(Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall,
And stain the pavement of my regal hall;
Where famishâd dogs, late guardians of my door,
Shall lick their mangled masterâs spatterâd gore.
Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! âtis well;
Well have they perishâd, for in fight they fell.
Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best,
Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast.
But when the fates, in fulness of their rage,
Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age,
In dust the reverend lineaments deform,
And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm:
This, this is misery! the last, the worse,
That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!â

He said, and acting what no words could say,
Rent from his head the silver locks away.
With him the mournful mother bears a part;
Yet all her sorrows turn not Hectorâs heart.
The zone unbraced, her bosom she displayâd;
And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said:

âHave mercy on me, O my son! revere
The words of age; attend a parentâs prayer!
If ever thee in these fond arms I pressâd,
Or stillâd thy infant clamours at this breast;
Ah do not thus our helpless years forego,
But, by our walls secured, repel the foe.
Against his rage if singly thou proceed,
Shouldâst thou, (but Heaven avert it!) shouldâst thou bleed,
Nor must thy corse lie honourâd on the bier,
Nor spouse, nor mother, grace thee with a tear!
Far from our pious rites those dear remains
Must feast the vultures on the naked plains.â

So they, while down their cheeks the torrents roll;
But fixâd remains the purpose of his soul;
Resolved he stands, and with a fiery glance
Expects the heroâs terrible advance.
So, rollâd up in his den, the swelling snake
Beholds the traveller approach the brake;
When fed with noxious herbs his turgid veins
Have gatherâd half the poisons of the plains;
He burns, he stiffens with collected ire,
And his red eyeballs glare with living fire.
Beneath a turret, on his shield reclined,
He stood, and questionâd thus his mighty mind:[275]

âWhere lies my way? to enter in the wall?
Honour and shame the ungenerous thought recall:
Shall proud Polydamas before the gate
Proclaim, his counsels are obeyâd too late,
Which timely followâd but the former night,
What numbers had been saved by Hectorâs flight?
That wise advice rejected with disdain,
I feel my folly in my people slain.
Methinks my suffering countryâs voice I hear,
But most her worthless sons insult my ear,
On my rash courage charge the chance of war,
And blame those virtues which they cannot share.
Noâif I eâer return, return I must
Glorious, my countryâs terror laid in dust:
Or if I perish, let her see me fall
In field at least, and fighting for her wall.
And yet suppose these measures I forego,
Approach unarmâd, and parley with the foe,
The warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down,
And treat on terms of peace to save the town:
The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detainâd
(Cause of the war, and grievance of the land)
With honourable justice to restore:
And add half Ilionâs yet remaining store,
Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece
May share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace.
But why this thought? Unarmâd if I should go,
What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe,
But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow?
We greet not here, as man conversing man,
Met at an oak, or journeying oâer a plain;
No season now for calm familiar talk,
Like youths and maidens in an evening walk:
War is our business, but to whom is given
To die, or triumph, that, determine Heaven!â

Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew nigh;
His dreadful plumage nodded from on high;
The Pelian javelin, in his better hand,
Shot trembling rays that glitterâd oâer the land;
And on his breast the beamy splendour shone,
Like Joveâs own lightning, or the rising sun.
As Hector sees, unusual terrors rise,
Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.
He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind:
Achilles follows like the winged wind.
Thus at the panting dove a falcon flies
(The swiftest racer of the liquid skies),
Just when he holds, or thinks he holds his prey,
Obliquely wheeling through the aerial way,
With open beak and shrilling cries he springs,
And aims his claws, and shoots upon his wings:
No less fore-right the rapid chase they held,
One urged by fury, one by fear impellâd:
Now circling round the walls their course maintain,
Where the high watch-tower overlooks the plain;
Now where the fig-trees spread their umbrage broad,
(A wider compass,) smoke along the road.
Next by Scamanderâs double source they bound,
Where two famed fountains burst the parted ground;
This hot through scorching clefts is seen to rise,
With exhalations steaming to the skies;
That the green banks in summerâs heat oâerflows,
Like crystal clear, and cold as winter snows:
Each gushing fount a marble cistern fills,
Whose polishâd bed receives the falling rills;
Where Trojan dames (ere yet alarmâd by Greece)
Washâd their fair garments in the days of peace.[276]
By these they passâd, one chasing, one in flight:
(The mighty fled, pursued by stronger might:)
Swift was the course; no vulgar prize they play,
No vulgar victim must reward the day:
(Such as in races crown the speedy strife:)
The prize contended was great Hectorâs life.
As when some heroâs funerals are decreed
In grateful honour of the mighty dead;
Where high rewards the vigorous youth inflame
(Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame)
The panting coursers swiftly turn the goal,
And with them turns the raised spectatorâs soul:
Thus three times round the Trojan wall they fly.
The gazing gods lean forward from the sky;
To whom, while eager on the chase they look,
The sire of mortals and immortals spoke:

âUnworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven,
Behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
My heart partakes the generous Hectorâs pain;
Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain,
Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy,
From Idaâs summits, and the towers of Troy:
Now see him flying; to his fears resignâd,
And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
Consult, ye powers! (âtis worthy your debate)
Whether to snatch him from impending fate,
Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
(Good as he is) the lot imposed on man.â

Then Pallas thus: âShall he whose vengeance forms
The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms,
Shall he prolong one Trojanâs forfeit breath?
A man, a mortal, pre-ordainâd to death!
And will no murmurs fill the courts above?
No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?â

âGo then (returnâd the sire) without delay,
Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.â
Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies,
And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.

As through the forest, oâer the vale and lawn,
The well-breathâd beagle drives the flying fawn,
In vain he tries the covert of the brakes,
Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes;
Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews,
The certain hound his various maze pursues.
Thus step by step, whereâer the Trojan wheelâd,
There swift Achilles compassâd round the field.
Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends,
And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends,
(Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below,
From the high turrets might oppress the foe,)
So oft Achilles turns him to the plain:
He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.
As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace,
One to pursue, and one to lead the chase,
Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake,
Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake:
No less the labouring heroes pant and strain:
While that but flies, and this pursues in vain.

What god, O muse, assisted Hectorâs force
With fate itself so long to hold the course?
PhÅbus it was; who, in his latest hour,
Endued his knees with strength, his nerves with power:
And great Achilles, lest some Greekâs advance
Should snatch the glory from his lifted lance,
Signâd to the troops to yield his foe the way,
And leave untouchâd the honours of the day.

Jove lifts the golden balances, that show
The fates of mortal men, and things below:
Here each contending heroâs lot he tries,
And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies.
Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hectorâs fate;
Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight.

Then PhÅbus left him. Fierce Minerva flies
To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries:
âO loved of Jove! this day our labours cease,
And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.
Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far,
Drunk with renown, insatiable of war,
Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight,
Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
See, where in vain he supplicates above,
Rollâd at the feet of unrelenting Jove;
Rest here: myself will lead the Trojan on,
And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun.â

Her voice divine the chief with joyful mind
Obeyâd; and rested, on his lance reclined
While like Deiphobus the martial dame
(Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same),
In show an aid, by hapless Hectorâs side
Approachâd, and greets him thus with voice belied:

âToo long, O Hector! have I borne the sight
Of this distress, and sorrowâd in thy flight:
It fits us now a noble stand to make,
And here, as brothers, equal fates partake.â

Then he: âO prince! allied in blood and fame,
Dearer than all that own a brotherâs name;
Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,
Long tried, long loved: much loved, but honoured more!
Since you, of all our numerous race alone
Defend my life, regardless of your own.â

Again the goddess: âMuch my fatherâs prayer,
And much my motherâs, pressâd me to forbear:
My friends embraced my knees, adjured my stay,
But stronger love impellâd, and I obey.
Come then, the glorious conflict let us try,
Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly;
Or let us stretch Achilles on the field,
Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield.â

Fraudful she said; then swiftly marchâd before:
The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more.
Sternly they met. The silence Hector broke:
His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke:

âEnough, O son of Peleus! Troy has viewâd
Her walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued.
But now some god within me bids me try
Thine, or my fate: I kill thee, or I die.
Yet on the verge of battle let us stay,
And for a momentâs space suspend the day;
Let Heavenâs high powers be callâd to arbitrate
The just conditions of this stern debate,
(Eternal witnesses of all below,
And faithful guardians of the treasured vow!)
To them I swear; if, victor in the strife,
Jove by these hands shall shed thy noble life,
No vile dishonour shall thy corse pursue;
Strippâd of its arms alone (the conquerorâs due)
The rest to Greece uninjured Iâll restore:
Now plight thy mutual oath, I ask no more.â

âTalk not of oaths (the dreadful chief replies,
While anger flashâd from his disdainful eyes),
Detested as thou art, and ought to be,
Nor oath nor pact Achilles plights with thee:
Such pacts as lambs and rabid wolves combine,
Such leagues as men and furious lions join,
To such I call the gods! one constant state
Of lasting rancour and eternal hate:
No thought but rage, and never-ceasing strife,
Till death extinguish rage, and thought, and life.
Rouse then thy forces this important hour,
Collect thy soul, and call forth all thy power.
No further subterfuge, no further chance;
âTis Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my lance.
Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath,
Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy death.â

He spoke, and launchâd his javelin at the foe;
But Hector shunnâd the meditated blow:
He stoopâd, while oâer his head the flying spear
Sang innocent, and spent its force in air.
Minerva watchâd it falling on the land,
Then drew, and gave to great Achillesâ hand,
Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy,
Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.

âThe life you boasted to that javelin given,
Prince! you have missâd. My fate depends on Heaven,
To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown,
Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own.
Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind,
And with false terrors sink anotherâs mind.
But know, whatever fate I am to try,
By no dishonest wound shall Hector die.
I shall not fall a fugitive at least,
My soul shall bravely issue from my breast.
But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart
End all my countryâs woes, deep buried in thy heart.â

The weapon flew, its course unerring held,
Unerring, but the heavenly shield repellâd
The mortal dart; resulting with a bound
From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.
Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain,
Nor other lance, nor other hope remain;
He calls Deiphobus, demands a spearâ
In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh;
ââTis soâHeaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!
I deemâd Deiphobus had heard my call,
But he secure lies guarded in the wall.
A god deceived me; Pallas, âtwas thy deed,
Death and black fate approach! âtis I must bleed.
No refuge now, no succour from above,
Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove,
Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome fate!
âTis true I perish, yet I perish great:
Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire,
Let future ages hear it, and admire!â

Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew,
And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
So Joveâs bold bird, high balanced in the air,
Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare.
Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares:
Before his breast the flaming shield he bears,
Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone
The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun.
Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!)
And as he moved, his figure seemâd on flame.
As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,[277]
Far-beaming oâer the silver host of night,
When all the starry train emblaze the sphere:
So shone the point of great Achillesâ spear.
In his right hand he waves the weapon round,
Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound;
But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore
Securely cased the warriorâs body oâer.
One space at length he spies, to let in fate,
Where âtwixt the neck and throat the jointed plate
Gave entrance: through that penetrable part
Furious he drove the well-directed dart:
Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power
Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour.
Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies,
While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries:

âAt last is Hector stretchâd upon the plain,
Who fearâd no vengeance for Patroclus slain:
Then, prince! you should have fearâd, what now you feel;
Achilles absent was Achilles still:
Yet a short space the great avenger stayed,
Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.
Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adornâd,
For ever honourâd, and for ever mournâd:
While cast to all the rage of hostile power,
Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour.â

Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death:
âBy thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath!
By all the sacred prevalence of prayer;
Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!
The common rites of sepulture bestow,
To soothe a fatherâs and a motherâs woe:
Let their large gifts procure an urn at least,
And Hectorâs ashes in his country rest.â

âNo, wretch accursed! relentless he replies;
(Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;)
Not those who gave me breath should bid me spare,
Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer.
Could I myself the bloody banquet join!
Noâto the dogs that carcase I resign.
Should Troy, to bribe me, bring forth all her store,
And giving thousands, offer thousands more;
Should Dardan Priam, and his weeping dame,
Drain their whole realm to buy one funeral flame:
Their Hector on the pile they should not see,
Nor rob the vultures of one limb of thee.â

Then thus the chief his dying accents drew:
âThy rage, implacable! too well I knew:
The Furies that relentless breast have steelâd,
And cursed thee with a heart that cannot yield.
Yet think, a day will come, when fateâs decree
And angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee;
PhÅbus and Paris shall avenge my fate,
And stretch thee here before the ScÃ¦an gate.â[278]

He ceased. The Fates suppressâd his labouring breath,
And his eyes stiffenâd at the hand of death;
To the dark realm the spirit wings its way,
(The manly body left a load of clay,)
And plaintive glides along the dreary coast,
A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

Achilles, musing as he rollâd his eyes
Oâer the dead hero, thus unheard, replies:
âDie thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain,
I follow theeââHe said, and strippâd the slain.
Then forcing backward from the gaping wound
The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
The thronging Greeks behold with wondering eyes
His manly beauty and superior size;
While some, ignobler, the great dead deface
With wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace:

âHow changed that Hector, who like Jove of late
Sent lightning on our fleets, and scatterâd fate!â

High oâer the slain the great Achilles stands,
Begirt with heroes and surrounding bands;
And thus aloud, while all the host attends:
âPrinces and leaders! countrymen and friends!
Since now at length the powerful will of heaven
The dire destroyer to our arm has given,
Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye powers!
See, if already their deserted towers
Are left unmannâd; or if they yet retain
The souls of heroes, their great Hector slain.
But what is Troy, or glory what to me?
Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee,
Divine Patroclus! Death hath sealâd his eyes;
Unwept, unhonourâd, uninterrâd he lies!
Can his dear image from my soul depart,
Long as the vital spirit moves my heart?
If in the melancholy shades below,
The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow,
Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecayâd,
Burn on through death, and animate my shade.
Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring
The corpse of Hector, and your pÃ¦ans sing.
Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore,
âHector is dead, and Ilion is no more.ââ

Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred;
(Unworthy of himself, and of the dead;)
The nervous ancles bored, his feet he bound
With thongs inserted through the double wound;
These fixâd up high behind the rolling wain,
His graceful head was trailâd along the plain.
Proud on his car the insulting victor stood,
And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.
He smites the steeds; the rapid chariot flies;
The sudden clouds of circling dust arise.
Now lost is all that formidable air;
The face divine, and long-descending hair,
Purple the ground, and streak the sable sand;
Deformâd, dishonourâd, in his native land,
Given to the rage of an insulting throng,
And, in his parentsâ sight, now draggâd along!

The mother first beheld with sad survey;
She rent her tresses, venerable grey,
And cast, far off, the regal veils away.
With piercing shrieks his bitter fate she moans,
While the sad father answers groans with groans,
Tears after tears his mournful cheeks oâerflow,
And the whole city wears one face of woe:
No less than if the rage of hostile fires,
From her foundations curling to her spires,
Oâer the proud citadel at length should rise,
And the last blaze send Ilion to the skies.
The wretched monarch of the falling state,
Distracted, presses to the Dardan gate.
Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course,
While strong affliction gives the feeble force:
Grief tears his heart, and drives him to and fro,
In all the raging impotence of woe.
At length he rollâd in dust, and thus begun,
Imploring all, and naming one by one:
âAh! let me, let me go where sorrow calls;
I, only I, will issue from your walls
(Guide or companion, friends! I ask ye none),
And bow before the murderer of my son.
My grief perhaps his pity may engage;
Perhaps at least he may respect my age.
He has a father too; a man like me;
One, not exempt from age and misery
(Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace
Begot this pest of me, and all my race).
How many valiant sons, in early bloom,
Has that cursed hand sent headlong to the tomb!
Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave)
Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
O had thy gentle spirit passâd in peace,
The son expiring in the sireâs embrace,
While both thy parents wept the fatal hour,
And, bending oâer thee, mixâd the tender shower!
Some comfort that had been, some sad relief,
To melt in full satiety of grief!â

Thus wailâd the father, grovelling on the ground,
And all the eyes of Ilion streamâd around.

Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:
(A mourning princess, and a train in tears;)
âAh why has Heaven prolongâd this hated breath,
Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
O Hector! late thy parentsâ pride and joy,
The boast of nations! the defence of Troy!
To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
Her chief, her hero, and almost her god!
O fatal change! become in one sad day
A senseless corse! inanimated clay!â

But not as yet the fatal news had spread
To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
As yet no messenger had told his fate,
Not eâen his stay without the Scaean gate.
Far in the close recesses of the dome,
Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
A growing work employâd her secret hours,
Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn,
The bath preparing for her lordâs return
In vain; alas! her lord returns no more;
Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
Now from the walls the clamours reach her ear,
And all her members shake with sudden fear:
Forth from her ivory hand the shuttle falls,
And thus, astonishâd, to her maids she calls:


[Illustration: ] THE BATH


âAh follow me! (she cried) what plaintive noise
Invades my ear? âTis sure my motherâs voice.
My faltering knees their trembling frame desert,
A pulse unusual flutters at my heart;
Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate
(Ye gods avert it!) threats the Trojan state.
Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!
But much I fear my Hectorâs dauntless breast
Confronts Achilles; chased along the plain,
Shut from our walls! I fear, I fear him slain!
Safe in the crowd he ever scornâd to wait,
And sought for glory in the jaws of fate:
Perhaps that noble heat has cost his breath,
Now quenchâd for ever in the arms of death.â

She spoke: and furious, with distracted pace,
Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face,
Flies through the dome (the maids her steps pursue),
And mounts the walls, and sends around her view.
Too soon her eyes the killing object found,
The godlike Hector draggâd along the ground.
A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes:
She faints, she falls; her breath, her colour flies.
Her hairâs fair ornaments, the braids that bound,
The net that held them, and the wreath that crownâd,
The veil and diadem flew far away
(The gift of Venus on her bridal day).
Around a train of weeping sisters stands,
To raise her sinking with assistant hands.
Scarce from the verge of death recallâd, again
She faints, or but recovers to complain.


[Illustration: ] ANDROMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL


âO wretched husband of a wretched wife!
Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!
For sure one star its baneful beam displayâd
On Priamâs roof, and Hippoplaciaâs shade.
From different parents, different climes we came.
At different periods, yet our fate the same!
Why was my birth to great AÃ«tion owed,
And why was all that tender care bestowâd?
Would I had never been!âO thou, the ghost
Of my dead husband! miserably lost!
Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
And I abandonâd, desolate, alone!
An only child, once comfort of my pains,
Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
No more to smile upon his sire; no friend
To help him now! no father to defend!
For should he âscape the sword, the common doom,
What wrongs attend him, and what griefs to come!
Even from his own paternal roof expellâd,
Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
The day, that to the shades the father sends,
Robs the sad orphan of his fatherâs friends:
He, wretched outcast of mankind! appears
For ever sad, for ever bathed in tears;
Amongst the happy, unregarded, he
Hangs on the robe, or trembles at the knee,
While those his fatherâs former bounty fed
Nor reach the goblet, nor divide the bread:
The kindest but his present wants allay,
To leave him wretched the succeeding day.
Frugal compassion! Heedless, they who boast
Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost,
Shall cry, âBegone! thy father feasts not here:â
The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears,
To my sad soul Astyanax appears!
Forced by repeated insults to return,
And to his widowâd mother vainly mourn:
He, who, with tender delicacy bred,
With princes sported, and on dainties fed,
And when still evening gave him up to rest,
Sunk soft in down upon the nurseâs breast,
Mustâah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls
Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,[279]
Is now that name no more, unhappy boy!
Since now no more thy father guards his Troy.
But thou, my Hector, liest exposed in air,
Far from thy parentsâ and thy consortâs care;
Whose hand in vain, directed by her love,
The martial scarf and robe of triumph wove.
Now to devouring flames be these a prey,
Useless to thee, from this accursed day!
Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid,
An honour to the living, not the dead!â


So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear, Sigh back her sighs, and
answer tear with tear.




BOOK XXIII.


ARGUMENT.


FUNERAL GAMES IN HONOUR OF PATROCLUS.[280]


Achilles and the Myrmidons do honours to the body of Patroclus. After
the funeral feast he retires to the sea-shore, where, falling asleep,
the ghost of his friend appears to him, and demands the rites of
burial; the next morning the soldiers are sent with mules and waggons
to fetch wood for the pyre. The funeral procession, and the offering
their hair to the dead. Achilles sacrifices several animals, and lastly
twelve Trojan captives, at the pile; then sets fire to it. He pays
libations to the Winds, which (at the instance of Iris) rise, and raise
the flames. When the pile has burned all night, they gather the bones,
place them in an urn of gold, and raise the tomb. Achilles institutes
the funeral games: the chariot-race, the fight of the caestus, the
wrestling, the foot-race, the single combat, the discus, the shooting
with arrows, the darting the javelin: the various descriptions of
which, and the various success of the several antagonists, make the
greatest part of the book.
    In this book ends the thirtieth day. The night following, the ghost
    of Patroclus appears to Achilles: the one-and-thirtieth day is
    employed in felling the timber for the pile: the two-and-thirtieth
    in burning it; and the three-and-thirtieth in the games. The scene
    is generally on the sea-shore.


Thus humbled in the dust, the pensive train
Through the sad city mournâd her hero slain.
The body soilâd with dust, and black with gore,
Lies on broad Hellespontâs resounding shore.
The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand,
All, but the martial Myrmidonian band:
These yet assembled great Achilles holds,
And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds:

âNot yet, my brave companions of the war,
Release your smoking coursers from the car;
But, with his chariot each in order led,
Perform due honours to Patroclus dead.
Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief,
Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief.â

The troops obeyâd; and thrice in order led[281]
(Achilles first) their coursers round the dead;
And thrice their sorrows and laments renew;
Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.
For such a warrior Thetis aids their woe,
Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow.
But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs
Burst from his heart, and torrents from his eyes:
His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laid
On his dead friendâs cold breast, and thus he said:

âAll hail, Patroclus! let thy honourâd ghost
Hear, and rejoice on Plutoâs dreary coast;
Behold! Achillesâ promise is complete;
The bloody Hector stretchâd before thy feet.
Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign;
And twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line,
Sacred to vengeance, instant shall expire;
Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre.â

Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view)
Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw,
Prone on the dust. The Myrmidons around
Unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.
All to Achillesâ sable ship repair,
Frequent and full, the genial feast to share.
Now from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire,
The bristly victims hissing oâer the fire:
The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries
Expires the goat; the sheep in silence dies.
Around the heroâs prostrate body flowâd,
In one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
And now a band of Argive monarchs brings
The glorious victor to the king of kings.
From his dead friend the pensive warrior went,
With steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
The attending heralds, as by office bound,
With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround:
To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore,
They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:[282]

âNo drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
The first and greatest of the gods above!
Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rear
The grassy mound, and clip thy sacred hair.
Some ease at least those pious rites may give,
And soothe my sorrows, while I bear to live.
Howeâer, reluctant as I am, I stay
And share your feast; but with the dawn of day,
(O king of men!) it claims thy royal care,
That Greece the warriorâs funeral pile prepare,
And bid the forests fall: (such rites are paid
To heroes slumbering in eternal shade:)
Then, when his earthly part shall mount in fire,
Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire.â

He spoke: they hear him, and the word obey;
The rage of hunger and of thirst allay,
Then ease in sleep the labours of the day.
But great Pelides, stretchâd along the shore,
Where, dashâd on rocks, the broken billows roar,
Lies inly groaning; while on either hand
The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
Along the grass his languid members fall,
Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall;
Hushâd by the murmurs of the rolling deep,
At length he sinks in the soft arms of sleep.
When lo! the shade, before his closing eyes,
Of sad Patroclus rose, or seemâd to rise:
In the same robe he living wore, he came:
In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same.
The form familiar hoverâd oâer his head,
âAnd sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom said:)
Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
Living, I seemâd his dearest, tenderest care,
But now forgot, I wander in the air.
Let my pale corse the rites of burial know,
And give me entrance in the realms below:
Till then the spirit finds no resting-place,
But here and there the unbodied spectres chase
The vagrant dead around the dark abode,
Forbid to cross the irremeable flood.
Now give thy hand; for to the farther shore
When once we pass, the soul returns no more:
When once the last funereal flames ascend,
No more shall meet Achilles and his friend;
No more our thoughts to those we loved make known;
Or quit the dearest, to converse alone.
Me fate has severâd from the sons of earth,
The fate fore-doomâd that waited from my birth:
Thee too it waits; before the Trojan wall
Even great and godlike thou art doomâd to fall.
Hear then; and as in fate and love we join,
Ah suffer that my bones may rest with thine!
Together have we lived; together bred,
One house received us, and one table fed;
That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave,
May mix our ashes in one common grave.â

âAnd is it thou? (he answers) To my sight[283]
Once more returnâst thou from the realms of night?
O more than brother! Think each office paid,
Whateâer can rest a discontented shade;
But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!
Afford at least that melancholy joy.â

He said, and with his longing arms essayâd
In vain to grasp the visionary shade!
Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,[284]
And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.
Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands
Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands,
Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:

ââTis true, âtis certain; man, though dead, retains
Part of himself; the immortal mind remains:
The form subsists without the bodyâs aid,
Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
This night my friend, so late in battle lost,
Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost:
Even now familiar, as in life, he came;
Alas! how different! yet how like the same!â

Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:
And now the rosy-fingerâd morn appears,
Shows every mournful face with tears oâerspread,
And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,
With mules and waggons sends a chosen band
To load the timber, and the pile to rear;
A charge consignâd to Merionâs faithful care.
With proper instruments they take the road,
Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
Oâer hills, oâer dales, oâer crags, oâer rocks they go:[285]
Jumping, high oâer the shrubs of the rough ground,
Rattle the clattering cars, and the shockâd axles bound.
But when arrived at Idaâs spreading woods,[286]
(Fair Ida, waterâd with descending floods,)
Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;
Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
And the slow mules the same rough road return.
The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore
(Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore;
There on the spot which great Achilles showâd,
They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load;
Circling around the place, where times to come
Shall view Patroclusâ and Achillesâ tomb.
The hero bids his martial troops appear
High on their cars in all the pomp of war;
Each in refulgent arms his limbs attires,
All mount their chariots, combatants and squires.
The chariots first proceed, a shining train;
Then clouds of foot that smoke along the plain;
Next these the melancholy band appear;
Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the bier;
Oâer all the corse their scattered locks they throw;
Achilles next, oppressâd with mighty woe,
Supporting with his hands the heroâs head,
Bends oâer the extended body of the dead.
Patroclus decent on the appointed ground
They place, and heap the sylvan pile around.
But great Achilles stands apart in prayer,
And from his head divides the yellow hair;
Those curling locks which from his youth he vowâd,[287]
And sacred grew, to Sperchiusâ honourâd flood:
Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast,
And rollâd his eyes around the watery waste:

âSperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost
Delightful roll along my native coast!
To whom we vainly vowâd, at our return,
These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn:
Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice,
Where to the day thy silver fountains rise,
And where in shade of consecrated bowers
Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers!
So vowâd my father, but he vowâd in vain;
No more Achilles sees his native plain;
In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow,
Patroclus bears them to the shades below.â

Thus oâer Patroclus while the hero prayâd,
On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid.
Once more afresh the Grecian sorrows flow:
And now the sun had set upon their woe;
But to the king of men thus spoke the chief:
âEnough, Atrides! give the troops relief:
Permit the mourning legions to retire,
And let the chiefs alone attend the pyre;
The pious care be ours, the dead to burnââ
He said: the people to their ships return:
While those deputed to inter the slain
Heap with a rising pyramid the plain.[288]
A hundred foot in length, a hundred wide,
The growing structure spreads on every side;
High on the top the manly corse they lay,
And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay:
Achilles covered with their fat the dead,
And the piled victims round the body spread;
Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil,
Suspends around, low-bending oâer the pile.
Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan
Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown.
Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,
Fall two, selected to attend their lord,
Then last of all, and horrible to tell,
Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.[289]
On these the rage of fire victorious preys,
Involves and joins them in one common blaze.
Smearâd with the bloody rites, he stands on high,
And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:[290]

âAll hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost
Hear, and exult, on Plutoâs dreary coast.
Behold Achillesâ promise fully paid,
Twelve Trojan heroes offerâd to thy shade;
But heavier fates on Hectorâs corse attend,
Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to rend.â

So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vain
His threat, and guard inviolate the slain:
Celestial Venus hoverâd oâer his head,
And roseate unguents, heavenly fragrance! shed:
She watchâd him all the night and all the day,
And drove the bloodhounds from their destined prey.
Nor sacred PhÅbus less employâd his care;
He pourâd around a veil of gatherâd air,
And kept the nerves undried, the flesh entire,
Against the solar beam and Sirian fire.


[Illustration: ] THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS


Nor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies,
Smokes, nor as yet the sullen flames arise;
But, fast beside, Achilles stood in prayer,
Invoked the gods whose spirit moves the air,
And victims promised, and libations cast,
To gentle Zephyr and the Boreal blast:
He callâd the aerial powers, along the skies
To breathe, and whisper to the fires to rise.
The winged Iris heard the heroâs call,
And instant hastenâd to their airy hall,
Where in old Zephyrâs open courts on high,
Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky.
She shone amidst them, on her painted bow;
The rocky pavement glitterâd with the show.
All from the banquet rise, and each invites
The various goddess to partake the rites.
âNot so (the dame replied), I haste to go
To sacred Ocean, and the floods below:
Even now our solemn hecatombs attend,
And heaven is feasting on the worldâs green end
With righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!)
Far on the extremest limits of the main.
But Peleusâ son entreats, with sacrifice,
The western spirit, and the north, to rise!
Let on Patroclusâ pile your blast be driven,
And bear the blazing honours high to heaven.â

Swift as the word she vanishâd from their view;
Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew;
Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar,
And heaps on heaps the clouds are tossâd before.
To the wide main then stooping from the skies,
The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise:
Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls,
Till on the pile the gatherâd tempest falls.
The structure crackles in the roaring fires,
And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
All night Achilles hails Patroclusâ soul,
With large libations from the golden bowl.
As a poor father, helpless and undone,
Mourns oâer the ashes of an only son,
Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn,
And pours in tears, ere yet they close the urn:
So stayâd Achilles, circling round the shore,
So watchâd the flames, till now they flame no more.
âTwas when, emerging through the shades of night,
The morning planet told the approach of light;
And, fast behind, Auroraâs warmer ray
Oâer the broad ocean pourâd the golden day:
Then sank the blaze, the pile no longer burnâd,
And to their caves the whistling winds returnâd:
Across the Thracian seas their course they bore;
The ruffled seas beneath their passage roar.

Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep,
And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep,
Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd
Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood;
The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook
Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke:

âYe kings and princes of the Achaian name!
First let us quench the yet remaining flame
With sable wine; then, as the rites direct,
The heroâs bones with careful view select:
(Apart, and easy to be known they lie
Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:
The rest around the margin will be seen
Promiscuous, steeds and immolated men:)
These wrappâd in double cauls of fat, prepare;
And in the golden vase dispose with care;
There let them rest with decent honour laid,
Till I shall follow to the infernal shade.
Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands,
A common structure on the humble sands:
Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise,
And late posterity record our praise!â

The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow,
Wide oâer the pile the sable wine they throw,
And deep subsides the ashy heap below.
Next the white bones his sad companions place,
With tears collected, in the golden vase.
The sacred relics to the tent they bore;
The urn a veil of linen covered oâer.
That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire,
And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;
High in the midst they heap the swelling bed
Of rising earth, memorial of the dead.

The swarming populace the chief detains,
And leads amidst a wide extent of plains;
There placed them round: then from the ships proceeds
A train of oxen, mules, and stately steeds,
Vases and tripods (for the funeral games),
Resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames.
First stood the prizes to reward the force
Of rapid racers in the dusty course:
A woman for the first, in beautyâs bloom,
Skillâd in the needle, and the labouring loom;
And a large vase, where two bright handles rise,
Of twenty measures its capacious size.
The second victor claims a mare unbroke,
Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke:
The third, a charger yet untouchâd by flame;
Four ample measures held the shining frame:
Two golden talents for the fourth were placed:
An ample double bowl contents the last.
These in fair order ranged upon the plain,
The hero, rising, thus addressâd the train:

âBehold the prizes, valiant Greeks! decreed
To the brave rulers of the racing steed;
Prizes which none beside ourself could gain,
Should our immortal coursers take the plain;
(A race unrivallâd, which from oceanâs god
Peleus received, and on his son bestowâd.)
But this no time our vigour to display;
Nor suit, with them, the games of this sad day:
Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck
Their flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck.
Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand,
And trail those graceful honours on the sand!
Let others for the noble task prepare,
Who trust the courser and the flying car.â

Fired at his word the rival racers rise;
But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize,
Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed,
And skillâd to manage the high-bounding steed.
With equal ardour bold Tydides swellâd,
The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke compellâd
(Which late obeyâd the Dardan chiefâs command,
When scarce a god redeemâd him from his hand).
Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,
And the famed courser of the king of kings:
Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave),
To âscape the wars, to Agamemnon gave,
(Ãthe her name) at home to end his days;
Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
Next him Antilochus demands the course
With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.
Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins,
Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains;
Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears
The prudent son with unattending ears.

âMy son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast,
The gods have loved thee, and with arts have blessâd;
Neptune and Jove on thee conferrâd the skill
Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel.
To guide thy conduct little precept needs;
But slow, and past their vigour, are my steeds.
Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness known;
Compare those rivalsâ judgment and thy own:
It is not strength, but art, obtains the prize,
And to be swift is less than to be wise.
âTis more by art than force of numerous strokes
The dexterous woodman shapes the stubborn oaks;
By art the pilot, through the boiling deep
And howling tempest, steers the fearless ship;
And âtis the artist wins the glorious course;
Not those who trust in chariots and in horse.
In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive,
And short, or wide, the ungovernâd courser drive:
While with sure skill, though with inferior steeds,
The knowing racer to his end proceeds;
Fixâd on the goal his eye foreruns the course,
His hand unerring steers the steady horse,
And now contracts, or now extends the rein,
Observing still the foremost on the plain.
Mark then the goal, âtis easy to be found;
Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground;
Of some once stately oak the last remains,
Or hardy fir, unperishâd with the rains:
Inclosed with stones, conspicuous from afar;
And round, a circle for the wheeling car.
(Some tomb perhaps of old, the dead to grace;
Or then, as now, the limit of a race.)
Bear close to this, and warily proceed,
A little bending to the left-hand steed;
But urge the right, and give him all the reins;
While thy strict hand his fellowâs head restrains,
And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll,
The wheelâs round naves appear to brush the goal.
Yet (not to break the car, or lame the horse)
Clear of the stony heap direct the course;
Lest through incaution failing, thou mayst be
A joy to others, a reproach to me.
So shalt thou pass the goal, secure of mind,
And leave unskilful swiftness far behind:
Though thy fierce rival drove the matchless steed
Which bore Adrastus, of celestial breed;
Or the famed race, through all the regions known,
That whirlâd the car of proud Laomedon.â

Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sage
Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,
The last, but not least ardent for the prize.
They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose
(Rollâd in his helmet, these Achilles throws).
Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then;
And next the brother of the king of men:
Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast;
And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
They stand in order, an impatient train:
Pelides points the barrier on the plain,
And sends before old PhÅnix to the place,
To mark the racers, and to judge the race.
At once the coursers from the barrier bound;
The lifted scourges all at once resound;
Their heart, their eyes, their voice, they send before;
And up the champaign thunder from the shore:
Thick, where they drive, the dusty clouds arise,
And the lost courser in the whirlwind flies;
Loose on their shoulders the long manes reclined,
Float in their speed, and dance upon the wind:
The smoking chariots, rapid as they bound,
Now seem to touch the sky, and now the ground.
While hot for fame, and conquest all their care,
(Each oâer his flying courser hung in air,)
Erect with ardour, poised upon the rein,
They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain.
Now (the last compass fetchâd around the goal)
At the near prize each gathers all his soul,
Each burns with double hope, with double pain,
Tears up the shore, and thunders toward the main.
First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds;
With those of Tros bold Diomed succeeds:
Close on Eumelusâ back they puff the wind,
And seem just mounting on his car behind;
Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze,
And, hovering oâer, their stretching shadows sees.
Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize;
But angry PhÅbus to Tydides flies,
Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain
His matchless horsesâ labour on the plain.
Rage fills his eye with anguish, to survey
Snatchâd from his hope the glories of the day.
The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain,
Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again,
And fills his steeds with vigour. At a stroke
She breaks his rivalâs chariot from the yoke:
No more their way the startled horses held;
The car reversed came rattling on the field;
Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel,
Prone on the dust the unhappy master fell;
His batterâd face and elbows strike the ground;
Nose, mouth, and front, one undistinguishâd wound:
Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes:
Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
Minervaâs spirit drives his matchless pace,
And crowns him victor of the labourâd race.

The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds;
While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:
âNow, now, my generous pair, exert your force;
Not that we hope to match Tydidesâ horse,
Since great Minerva wings their rapid way,
And gives their lord the honours of the day;
But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo
Your swiftness? vanquishâd by a female foe?
Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain
The last ignoble gift be all we gain,
No more shall Nestorâs hand your food supply,
The old manâs fury rises, and ye die.
Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight,
Presents the occasion, could we use it right.â

Thus he. The coursers at their masterâs threat
With quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.
And now Antilochus with nice survey
Observes the compass of the hollow way.
âTwas where, by force of wintry torrents torn,
Fast by the road a precipice was worn:
Here, where but one could pass, to shun the throng
The Spartan heroâs chariot smoked along.
Close up the venturous youth resolves to keep,
Still edging near, and bears him toward the steep.
Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below,
And wonders at the rashness of his foe.
âHold, stay your steedsâWhat madness thus to ride
This narrow way! take larger field (he cried),
Or both must fall.ââAtrides cried in vain;
He flies more fast, and throws up all the rein.
Far as an able arm the disk can send,
When youthful rivals their full force extend,
So far, Antilochus! thy chariot flew
Before the king: he, cautious, backward drew
His horse compellâd; foreboding in his fears
The rattling ruin of the clashing cars,
The floundering coursers rolling on the plain,
And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain.
But thus upbraids his rival as he flies:
âGo, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise!
Go, but expect not Iâll the prize resign;
Add perjury to fraud, and make it thineââ
Then to his steeds with all his force he cries,
âBe swift, be vigorous, and regain the prize!
Your rivals, destitute of youthful force,
With fainting knees shall labour in the course,
And yield the glory yours.ââThe steeds obey;
Already at their heels they wing their way,
And seem already to retrieve the day.

Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld
The coursers bounding oâer the dusty field.
The first who markâd them was the Cretan king;
High on a rising ground, above the ring,
The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey
He well observed the chief who led the way,
And heard from far his animating cries,
And saw the foremost steed with sharpenâd eyes;
On whose broad front a blaze of shining white,
Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight.
He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun:
âAre yonder horse discernâd by me alone?
Or can ye, all, another chief survey,
And other steeds than lately led the way?
Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld,
Lie sure disabled in the middle field:
For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain
I search to find them, but I search in vain.
Perchance the reins forsook the driverâs hand,
And, turnâd too short, he tumbled on the strand,
Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray
With frantic fury from the destined way.
Rise then some other, and inform my sight,
For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right;
Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air,
The great Ãtolian chief, renownâd in war.â

âOld man! (Oileus rashly thus replies)
Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize;
Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,
Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
Eumelusâ steeds, high bounding in the chase,
Still, as at first, unrivallâd lead the race:
I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,
And hear his shouts victorious oâer the plain.â

Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoinâd:
âBarbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside
The last in merit, as the first in pride!
To vile reproach what answer can we make?
A goblet or a tripod let us stake,
And be the king the judge. The most unwise
Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price.â

He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne,
Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn
To fell extremes. But Thetisâ godlike son
Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun:

âForbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend;
Much would ye blame, should others thus offend:
And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end.â
No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near,
Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer.
High oâer his head the circling lash he wields:
His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields:
His car amidst the dusty whirlwind rollâd,
Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold,
Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find
The track his flying wheels had left behind:
And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace
So swift, it seemâd a flight, and not a race.
Now victor at the goal Tydides stands,
Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands;
From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream;
The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam:
With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize,
The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes:
These to the ships his train triumphant leads,
The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds.

Young Nestor follows (who by art, not force,
Oâerpassâd Atrides) second in the course.
Behind, Atrides urged the race, more near
Than to the courser in his swift career
The following car, just touching with his heel
And brushing with his tail the whirling wheel:
Such, and so narrow now the space between
The rivals, late so distant on the green;
So soon swift Ãthe her lost ground regainâd,
One length, one moment, had the race obtainâd.

Merion pursued, at greater distance still,
With tardier coursers, and inferior skill.
Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son;
Slow dragged the steeds his batterâd chariot on:
Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun:

âBehold! the man whose matchless art surpassâd
The sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!
Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay
(Since great Tydides bears the first away)
To him the second honours of the day.â

The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries,
And then Eumelus had received the prize,
But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame,
The award opposes, and asserts his claim.
âThink not (he cries) I tamely will resign,
O Peleusâ son! the mare so justly mine.
What if the gods, the skilful to confound,
Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground?
Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice,
And vows omitted forfeited the prize.
If yet (distinction to thy friend to show,
And please a soul desirous to bestow)
Some gift must grace Eumelus, view thy store
Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore;
An ample present let him thence receive,
And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to give.
But this my prize I never shall forego;
This, who but touches, warriors! is my foe.â

Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend;
Pleased with the well-turnâd flattery of a friend,
Achilles smiled: âThe gift proposed (he cried),
Antilochus! we shall ourself provide.
With plates of brass the corslet coverâd oâer,
(The same renownâd Asteropaeus wore,)
Whose glittering margins raised with silver shine,
(No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine.â

He said: Automedon at his command
The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
Distinguishâd by his friend, his bosom glows
With generous joy: then Menelaus rose;
The herald placed the sceptre in his hands,
And stillâd the clamour of the shouting bands.
Not without cause incensed at Nestorâs son,
And inly grieving, thus the king begun:

âThe praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtainâd,
An act so rash, Antilochus! has stainâd.
Robbâd of my glory and my just reward,
To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared:
So not a leader shall our conduct blame,
Or judge me envious of a rivalâs fame.
But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise,
And vindicate by oath thâ ill-gotten prize?
Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand,
The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand;
And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent
Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround
The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!â

The prudent chief with calm attention heard;
Then mildly thus: âExcuse, if youth have errâd;
Superior as thou art, forgive the offence,
Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.
Thou knowâst the errors of unripenâd age,
Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign;
The mare, or aught thou askâst, be freely thine
Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn)
Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn.â

So spoke Antilochus; and at the word
The mare contested to the king restored.
Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain
Lifts the green ear above the springing plain,
The fields their vegetable life renew,
And laugh and glitter with the morning dew;
Such joy the Spartanâs shining face oâerspread,
And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said:

âStill may our souls, O generous youth! agree
âTis now Atridesâ turn to yield to thee.
Rash heat perhaps a moment might control,
Not break, the settled temper of thy soul.
Not but (my friend) âtis still the wiser way
To waive contention with superior sway;
For ah! how few, who should like thee offend,
Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone,
Suffice thy fatherâs merit and thy own:
Generous alike, for me, the sire and son
Have greatly sufferâd, and have greatly done.
I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend,
Nor is my pride preferrâd before my friend.â

He said; and pleased his passion to command,
Resignâd the courser to Noemonâs hand,
Friend of the youthful chief: himself content,
The shining charger to his vessel sent.
The golden talents Merion next obtainâd;
The fifth reward, the double bowl, remainâd.
Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears.
And thus the purpose of his gift declares:
âAccept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said)
In dear memorial of Patroclus dead;
Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies,
For ever snatchâd from our desiring eyes!
Take thou this token of a grateful heart,
Though âtis not thine to hurl the distant dart,
The quoit to toss, the ponderous mace to wield,
Or urge the race, or wrestle on the field:
Thy pristine vigour age has overthrown,
But left the glory of the past thy own.â

He said, and placed the goblet at his side;
With joy the venerable king replied:

âWisely and well, my son, thy words have proved
A senior honourâd, and a friend beloved!
Too true it is, deserted of my strength,
These witherâd arms and limbs have failâd at length.
Oh! had I now that force I felt of yore,
Known through Buprasium and the Pylian shore!
Victorious then in every solemn game,
Ordainâd to Amaryncesâ mighty name;
The brave Epeians gave my glory way,
Ãtolians, Pylians, all resignâd the day.
I quellâd Clytomedes in fights of hand,
And backward hurlâd Ancaeus on the sand,
Surpassâd Iphyclus in the swift career,
Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear.
The sons of Actor won the prize of horse,
But won by numbers, not by art or force:
For the famed twins, impatient to survey
Prize after prize by Nestor borne away,
Sprung to their car; and with united pains
One lashâd the coursers, while one ruled the reins.
Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeeds
A younger race, that emulate our deeds:
I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?)
Though once the foremost hero of the field.
Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led,
With martial honours decorate the dead:
While pleased I take the gift thy hands present,
(Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,)
Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
Not one but honours sacred age and me:
Those due distinctions thou so well canst pay,
May the just gods return another day!â

Proud of the gift, thus spake the full of days:
Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise.

The prizes next are orderâd to the field,
For the bold champions who the caestus wield.
A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke,
Of six yearsâ age, unconscious of the yoke,
Is to the circus led, and firmly bound;
Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round.
Achilles rising, thus: âLet Greece excite
Two heroes equal to this hardy fight;
Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke,
And rush beneath the long-descending stroke.
On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow,
And whom the Greeks supreme by conquest know,
This mule his dauntless labours shall repay,
The vanquishâd bear the massy bowl away.â

This dreadful combat great EpeÃ¼s chose;[291]
High oâer the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose,
And seized the beast, and thus began to say:
âStand forth some man, to bear the bowl away!
(Price of his ruin: for who dares deny
This mule my right; the undoubted victor I)
Others, âtis ownâd, in fields of battle shine,
But the first honours of this fight are mine;
For who excels in all? Then let my foe
Draw near, but first his certain fortune know;
Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
Mash all his bones, and all his body pound:
So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,
To heave the batterâd carcase off the plain.â

The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
The host beheld him, silent with amaze!
âTwas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
To meet his might, and emulate thy sire,
The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore
In Theban games the noblest trophy bore,
(The games ordainâd dead OEdipus to grace,)
And singly vanquish the Cadmean race.
Him great Tydides urges to contend,
Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend;
Officious with the cincture girds him round;
And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
Amid the circle now each champion stands,
And poises high in air his iron hands;
With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close,
Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows,
And painful sweat from all their members flows.
At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow
Full on the cheek of his unwary foe;
Beneath that ponderous armâs resistless sway
Down droppâd he, nerveless, and extended lay.
As a large fish, when winds and waters roar,
By some huge billow dashâd against the shore,
Lies panting; not less batterâd with his wound,
The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends,
Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends;
Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,
And dragging his disabled legs along;
Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder oâer;
His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;[292]
Wrappâd round in mists he lies, and lost to thought;
His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.

The third bold game Achilles next demands,
And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:
A massy tripod for the victor lies,
Of twice six oxen its reputed price;
And next, the loserâs spirits to restore,
A female captive, valued but at four.
Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife propose
When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
Amid the ring each nervous rival stands,
Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
Close lockâd above, their heads and arms are mixâd:
Below, their planted feet at distance fixâd;
Like two strong rafters which the builder forms,
Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms,
Their tops connected, but at wider space
Fixâd on the centre stands their solid base.
Now to the grasp each manly body bends;
The humid sweat from every pore descends;
Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs
Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.
Nor could Ulysses, for his art renownâd,
Oâerturn the strength of Ajax on the ground;
Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow
The watchful caution of his artful foe.
While the long strife even tired the lookers on,
Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon:
âOr let me lift thee, chief, or lift thou me:
Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree.â

He said; and, straining, heaved him off the ground
With matchless strength; that time Ulysses found
The strength to evade, and where the nerves combine
His ankle struck: the giant fell supine;
Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies;
Shouts of applause run rattling through the skies.
Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays;
He barely stirrâd him, but he could not raise:
His knee lockâd fast, the foeâs attempt denied;
And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.
Defiled with honourable dust they roll,
Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul:
Again they rage, again to combat rise;
When great Achilles thus divides the prize:

âYour noble vigour, O my friends, restrain;
Nor weary out your generous strength in vain.
Ye both have won: let others who excel,
Now prove that prowess you have proved so well.â

The heroâs words the willing chiefs obey,
From their tired bodies wipe the dust away,
And, clothed anew, the following games survey.

And now succeed the gifts ordainâd to grace
The youths contending in the rapid race:
A silver urn that full six measures held,
By none in weight or workmanship excellâd:
Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine,
Elaborate, with artifice divine;
Whence Tyrian sailors did the prize transport,
And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:
From him descended, good Eunaeus heirâd
The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward:
Now, the same heroâs funeral rites to grace,
It stands the prize of swiftness in the race.
A well-fed ox was for the second placed;
And half a talent must content the last.
Achilles rising then bespoke the train:
âWho hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,
Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain.â

The hero said, and starting from his place,
Oilean Ajax rises to the race;
Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpassâd
His youthful equals, Nestorâs son, the last.
Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;
Pelides points the barrier with his hand;
All start at once; Oileus led the race;
The next Ulysses, measuring pace with pace;
Behind him, diligently close, he sped,
As closely following as the running thread
The spindle follows, and displays the charms
Of the fair spinsterâs breast and moving arms:
Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies,
And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;
His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays:
The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:
To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,
And send their souls before him as he flies.
Now three times turnâd in prospect of the goal,
The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul:
âAssist, O goddess!â thus in thought he prayâd!
And present at his thought descends the maid.
Buoyâd by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,
And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain,
Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain
(Oâerturnâd by Pallas), where the slippery shore
Was cloggâd with slimy dung and mingled gore.
(The self-same place beside Patroclusâ pyre,
Where late the slaughterâd victims fed the fire.)
Besmearâd with filth, and blotted oâer with clay,
Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay;
The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,
And left the urn Ulyssesâ rich reward.
Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,
The baffled hero thus the Greeks addressâd:

âAccursed fate! the conquest I forego;
A mortal I, a goddess was my foe;
She urged her favourite on the rapid way,
And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day.â

Thus sourly wailâd he, sputtering dirt and gore;
A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,
Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest:

âWhy with our wiser elders should we strive?
The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize:
He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;
(A green old age unconscious of decays,
That proves the hero born in better days!)
Behold his vigour in this active race!
Achilles only boasts a swifter pace:
For who can match Achilles? He who can,
Must yet be more than hero, more than man.â

The effect succeeds the speech. Pelides cries,
âThy artful praise deserves a better prize.
Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extollâd;
Receive a talent of the purest gold.â
The youth departs content. The host admire
The son of Nestor, worthy of his sire.

Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings;
Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings:
Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore,
And great Patroclus in short triumph bore.
âStand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries)
Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize,
Now grace the lists before our armyâs sight,
And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.
Who first the jointed armour shall explore,
And stain his rivalâs mail with issuing gore,
The sword Asteropaeus possessâd of old,
(A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of gold,)
Shall pay the stroke, and grace the strikerâs side:
These arms in common let the chiefs divide:
For each brave champion, when the combat ends,
A sumptuous banquet at our tents attends.â

Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeusâ son,
And the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.
Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,
The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;
Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight;
Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
Opposed in arms not long they idly stood,
But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renewâd.
A furious pass the spear of Ajax made
Through the broad shield, but at the corslet stayâd.
Not thus the foe: his javelin aimâd above
The bucklerâs margin, at the neck he drove.
But Greece, now trembling for her heroâs life,
Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
Yet still the victorâs due Tydides gains,
With him the sword and studded belt remains.

Then hurlâd the hero, thundering on the ground,
A mass of iron (an enormous round),
Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire,
Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
This mighty quoit AÃ«tion wont to rear,
And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;
The giant by Achilles slain, he stowâd
Among his spoils this memorable load.
For this, he bids those nervous artists vie,
That teach the disk to sound along the sky.
âLet him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise;
Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;
If he be one enrichâd with large domain
Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain,
Small stock of iron needs that man provide;
His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied
From hence; nor ask the neighbouring cityâs aid
For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade.â

Stern Polypoetes steppâd before the throng,
And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
Whose force with rival forces to oppose,
Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.
Each stood in order: first Epeus threw;
High oâer the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
Leonteus next a little space surpassâd;
And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
Oâer both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung
From Polypoetesâ arm the discus sung:
Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,
That distant falls among the grazing cows,
So past them all the rapid circle flies:
His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies,
With force conjoinâd heave off the weighty prize.

Those, who in skilful archery contend,
He next invites the twanging bow to bend;
And twice ten axes casts amidst the round,
Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound
The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore,
The hero fixes in the sandy shore;
To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie,
The trembling mark at which their arrows fly.

âWhose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear
These two-edged axes, terrible in war;
The single, he whose shaft divides the cord.â
He said: experienced Merion took the word;
And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw
Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies;
But flies unblessâd! No grateful sacrifice,
No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow
To PhÅbus, patron of the shaft and bow.
For this, thy well-aimâd arrow turnâd aside,
Errâd from the dove, yet cut the cord that tied:
Adown the mainmast fell the parted string,
And the free bird to heaven displays her wing:
Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound,
And Merion eager meditates the wound:
He takes the bow, directs the shaft above,
And following with his eye the soaring dove,
Implores the god to speed it through the skies,
With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrifice,
The dove, in airy circles as she wheels,
Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels;
Quite through and through the point its passage found,
And at his feet fell bloody to the ground.
The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last,
With flagging wings alighted on the mast,
A moment hung, and spread her pinions there,
Then sudden droppâd, and left her life in air.
From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder rise,
And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.

To close the funeral games, Achilles last
A massy spear amid the circle placed,
And ample charger of unsullied frame,
With flowers high-wrought, not blackenâd yet by flame.
For these he bids the heroes prove their art,
Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize;
Nor here disdainâd the king of men to rise.
With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

âThee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
In every martial game thy worth attest,
And know thee both their greatest and their best.
Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
This beamy javelin in thy brotherâs war.â

Pleased from the heroâs lips his praise to hear,
The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
But, set apart for sacred use, commands
The glittering charger to Talthybiusâ hands.


[Illustration: ] CERES




BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.


THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.


The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hectorâs body. Jupiter
sends Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris
to Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old
king, notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for
the journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets
forth in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the
charge of Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young
man, and conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation
on the way. Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his
feet, and begs for the body of his son: Achilles, moved with
compassion, grants his request, detains him one night in his tent, and
the next morning sends him home with the body: the Trojans run out to
meet him. The lamentations of Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, with the
solemnities of the funeral.
    The time of twelve days is employed in this book, while the body of
    Hector lies in the tent of Achilles; and as many more are spent in
    the truce allowed for his interment. The scene is partly in
    Achillesâ camp, and partly in Troy.


Now from the finishâd games the Grecian band
Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand,
All stretchâd at ease the genial banquet share,
And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.
Not so Achilles: he, to grief resignâd,
His friendâs dear image present to his mind,
Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep;
Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.
Restless he rollâd around his weary bed,
And all his soul on his Patroclus fed:
The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind,
That youthful vigour, and that manly mind,
What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought,
What seas they measured, and what fields they fought;
All passâd before him in remembrance dear,
Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.
And now supine, now prone, the hero lay,
Now shifts his side, impatient for the day:
Then starting up, disconsolate he goes
Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.
There as the solitary mourner raves,
The ruddy morning rises oâer the waves:
Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he joinâd!
The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.
And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument
Was Hector draggâd, then hurried to the tent.
There sleep at last oâercomes the heroâs eyes;
While foul in dust the unhonourâd carcase lies,
But not deserted by the pitying skies:
For PhÅbus watchâd it with superior care,
Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air;
And, ignominious as it swept the field,
Spread oâer the sacred corse his golden shield.
All heaven was moved, and Hermes willâd to go
By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe:
But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,
And thâ unrelenting empress of the skies,
Eâer since that day implacable to Troy,
What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy,
Won by destructive lust (reward obscene),
Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen.
But when the tenth celestial morning broke,
To heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke:


[Illustration: ] HECTORâS BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES


âUnpitying powers! how oft each holy fane
Has Hector tinged with blood of victims slain?
And can ye still his cold remains pursue?
Still grudge his body to the Trojansâ view?
Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire,
The last sad honours of a funeral fire?
Is then the dire Achilles all your care?
That iron heart, inflexibly severe;
A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide,
In strength of rage, and impotence of pride;
Who hastes to murder with a savage joy,
Invades around, and breathes but to destroy!
Shame is not of his soul; nor understood,
The greatest evil and the greatest good.
Still for one loss he rages unresignâd,
Repugnant to the lot of all mankind;
To lose a friend, a brother, or a son,
Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done:
Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care;
Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.
But this insatiate, the commission given
By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven:
Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along
Hectorâs dead earth, insensible of wrong!
Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed,
He violates the laws of man and god.â


[Illustration: ] THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS


âIf equal honours by the partial skies
Are doomâd both heroes, (Juno thus replies,)
If Thetisâ son must no distinction know,
Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow.
But Hector only boasts a mortal claim,
His birth deriving from a mortal dame:
Achilles, of your own ethereal race,
Springs from a goddess by a manâs embrace
(A goddess by ourself to Peleus given,
A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven)
To grace those nuptials, from the bright abode
Yourselves were present; where this minstrel-god,
Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quire
Stood proud to hymn, and tune his youthful lyre.â

Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial dame:
âLet not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame;
Their merits, nor their honours, are the same.
But mine, and every godâs peculiar grace
Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race:
Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay,
(The only honours men to gods can pay,)
Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased
The pure libation, and the holy feast:
Howeâer by stealth to snatch the corse away,
We will not: Thetis guards it night and day.
But haste, and summon to our courts above
The azure queen; let her persuasion move
Her furious son from Priam to receive
The profferâd ransom, and the corse to leave.â

He added not: and Iris from the skies,
Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies,
Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps,
Refulgent gliding oâer the sable deeps.
Between where Samos wide his forests spreads,
And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,
Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;)
She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
As bearing death in the fallacious bait,
From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight;
So passâd the goddess through the closing wave,
Where Thetis sorrowâd in her secret cave:
There placed amidst her melancholy train
(The blue-hairâd sisters of the sacred main)
Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,
And wept her godlike sonâs approaching doom.
Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
âArise, O Thetis! from thy seats below,
âTis Jove that calls.âââAnd why (the dame replies)
Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?
Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
Howeâer, be heavenâs almighty sire obeyâdââ
She spake, and veilâd her head in sable shade,
Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
And forth she paced, majestically sad.

Then through the world of waters they repair
(The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
The deeps dividing, oâer the coast they rise,
And touch with momentary flight the skies.
There in the lightningâs blaze the sire they found,
And all the gods in shining synod round.
Thetis approachâd with anguish in her face,
(Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
And offerâd from her hand the nectar-bowl:
She tasted, and resignâd it: then began
The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

âThou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief oâercast;
Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares.
Nine days are past since all the court above
In Hectorâs cause have moved the ear of Jove;
âTwas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
By stealth should bear him, but we willâd not so:
We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
And to his conquest add this glory more.
Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:
Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far;
Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)
Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead;
But yield to ransom and the fatherâs prayer;
The mournful father, Iris shall prepare
With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands
Whateâer his honour asks, or heart demands.â

His word the silver-footed queen attends,
And from Olympusâ snowy tops descends.
Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,
And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:
His friends prepare the victim, and dispose
Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes;
The goddess seats her by her pensive son,
She pressâd his hand, and tender thus begun:

âHow long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow,
And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:
Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign
Soothes weary life, and softens human pain?
O snatch the moments yet within thy power;
Not long to live, indulge the amorous hour!
Lo! Jove himself (for Joveâs command I bear)
Forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far.
No longer then (his fury if thou dread)
Detain the relics of great Hector dead;
Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain,
But yield to ransom, and restore the slain.â

To whom Achilles: âBe the ransom given,
And we submit, since such the will of heaven.â

While thus they communed, from the Olympian bowers
Jove orders Iris to the Trojan towers:
âHaste, winged goddess! to the sacred town,
And urge her monarch to redeem his son.
Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave,
And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near
Except, to place the dead with decent care,
Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
May the slow mules and funeral car command.
Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread,
Safe through the foe by our protection led:
Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey,
Guard of his life, and partner of his way.
Fierce as he is, Achillesâ self shall spare
His age, nor touch one venerable hair:
Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
Some sense of duty, some desire to save.â


[Illustration: ] IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR


Then down her bow the winged Iris drives,
And swift at Priamâs mournful court arrives:
Where the sad sons beside their fatherâs throne
Sat bathed in tears, and answerâd groan with groan.
And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,
(Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrappâd attire
Concealâd from sight; with frantic hands he spread
A shower of ashes oâer his neck and head.
From room to room his pensive daughters roam;
Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;
Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy,
Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
Before the king Joveâs messenger appears,
And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:

âFear not, O father! no ill news I bear;
From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care;
For Hectorâs sake these walls he bids thee leave,
And bear what stern Achilles may receive;
Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,
Except, to place the dead with decent care,
Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
May the slow mules and funeral car command.
Nor shalt thou death, nor shalt thou danger dread:
Safe through the foe by his protection led:
Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,
Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way.
Fierce as he is, Achillesâ self shall spare
Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair;
Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
Some sense of duty, some desire to save.â

She spoke, and vanishâd. Priam bids prepare
His gentle mules and harness to the car;
There, for the gifts, a polishâd casket lay:
His pious sons the kingâs command obey.
Then passâd the monarch to his bridal-room,
Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume,
And where the treasures of his empire lay;
Then callâd his queen, and thus began to say:

âUnhappy consort of a king distressâd!
Partake the troubles of thy husbandâs breast:
I saw descend the messenger of Jove,
Who bids me try Achillesâ mind to move;
Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain
The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain.
Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to go
Through hostile camps, and bears me to the foe.â

The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing cries
Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies:
âAh! whither wanders thy distemperâd mind?
And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known;
Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face
(O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!
To view that deathful eye, and wander oâer
Those hands yet red with Hectorâs noble gore!
Alas! my lord! he knows not how to spare,
And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare;
So brave! so many fallen! To claim his rage
Vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.
Noâpent in this sad palace, let us give
To grief the wretched days we have to live.
Still, still for Hector let our sorrows flow,
Born to his own, and to his parentsâ woe!
Doomâd from the hour his luckless life begun,
To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleusâ son!
Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay
My rage, and these barbarities repay!
For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath
Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
He poured his latest blood in manly fight,
And fell a hero in his countryâs right.â

âSeek not to stay me, nor my soul affright
With words of omen, like a bird of night,
(Replied unmoved the venerable man;)
âTis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obeyâd.
A present goddess brought the high command,
I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
If in yon camp your powers have doomâd my fall,
ContentâBy the same hand let me expire!
Add to the slaughterâd son the wretched sire!
One cold embrace at least may be allowâd,
And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!â

From forth his openâd stores, this said, he drew
Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
As many vests, as many mantles told,
And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
And last a large well-labourâd bowl had place,
(The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
Seemâd all too mean the stores he could employ,
For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
Around him furious drives his menial train:
In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
âWhat make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries):
Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
Am I the only object of despair?
Am I become my peopleâs common show,
Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,
I see the ruins of your smoking town!
O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,
A willing ghost to Plutoâs dreary dome!â

He said, and feebly drives his friends away:
The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
Next on his sons his erring fury falls,
Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;
His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer,
And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine
Survived, sad relics of his numerous line.

âInglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
Why did not all in Hectorâs cause expire?
Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain.
You, the disgrace of Priamâs house, remain!
Mestor the brave, renownâd in ranks of war,
With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,[293]
And last great Hector, more than man divine,
For sure he seemâd not of terrestrial line!
All those relentless Mars untimely slew,
And left me these, a soft and servile crew,
Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ,
Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy!
Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run,
And speed my journey to redeem my son?â

The sons their fatherâs wretched age revere,
Forgive his anger, and produce the car.
High on the seat the cabinet they bind:
The new-made car with solid beauty shined;
Box was the yoke, embossâd with costly pains,
And hung with ringlets to receive the reins;
Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground:
These to the chariotâs polishâd pole they bound.
Then fixâd a ring the running reins to guide,
And close beneath the gatherâd ends were tied.
Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain)
The sad attendants load the groaning wain:
Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring,
(The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.)
But the fair horses, long his darling care,
Himself received, and harnessâd to his car:
Grieved as he was, he not this task denied;
The hoary herald helpâd him, at his side.
While careful these the gentle coursers joinâd,
Sad Hecuba approachâd with anxious mind;
A golden bowl that foamâd with fragrant wine,
(Libation destined to the power divine,)
Held in her right, before the steed she stands,
And thus consigns it to the monarchâs hands:

âTake this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms
His grace restore thee to our roof and arms.
Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine,
Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design;
Pray to that god, who high on Idaâs brow
Surveys thy desolated realms below,
His winged messenger to send from high,
And lead thy way with heavenly augury:
Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
Tower on the right of yon ethereal space.
That sign beheld, and strengthenâd from above,
Boldly pursue the journey markâd by Jove:
But if the god his augury denies,
Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice.â

ââTis just (said Priam) to the sire above
To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?â
He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring
The purest water of the living spring:
(Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:)
Then took the golden cup his queen had fillâd;
On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine,
Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:

âO first and greatest! heavenâs imperial lord!
On lofty Idaâs holy hill adored!
To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
And teach him mercy when a father prays.
If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky
Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
Tower on the right of yon ethereal space;
So shall thy suppliant, strengthenâd from above,
Fearless pursue the journey markâd by Jove.â

Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,
Despatchâd his bird, celestial augury!
The swift-wingâd chaser of the featherâd game,
And known to gods by Percnosâ lofty name.
Wide as appears some palace-gate displayâd,
So broad, his pinions stretchâd their ample shade,
As stooping dexter with resounding wings
The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
A dawn of joy in every face appears:
The mourning matron dries her timorous tears:
Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung;
The brazen portal in his passage rung;
The mules preceding draw the loaded wain,
Charged with the gifts: Idaeus holds the rein:
The king himself his gentle steeds controls,
And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.
On his slow wheels the following people wait,
Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate;
With hands uplifted eye him as he passâd,
And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
Now forward fares the father on his way,
Through the lone fields, and back to Ilion they.
Great Jove beheld him as he crossâd the plain,
And felt the woes of miserable man.
Then thus to Hermes: âThou whose constant cares
Still succour mortals, and attend their prayers;
Behold an object to thy charge consignâd:
If ever pity touchâd thee for mankind,
Go, guard the sire: the observing foe prevent,
And safe conduct him to Achillesâ tent.â

The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,[294]
And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain,
Oâer the wide earth, and oâer the boundless main;
Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye:
Thus armâd, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
And stoops on Hellespontâs resounding sea.
A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
He seemâd; fair offspring of some princely line!
Now twilight veilâd the glaring face of day,
And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
What time the herald and the hoary king
(Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
That circling Ilusâ ancient marble flows)
Allowâd their mules and steeds a short repose,
Through the dim shade the herald first espies
A manâs approach, and thus to Priam cries:
âI mark some foeâs advance: O king! beware;
This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?â

The afflicted monarch shiverâd with despair;
Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair;
Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;
A sudden trembling shook his aged frame:
When Hermes, greeting, touchâd his royal hand,
And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:

âSay whither, father! when each mortal sight
Is sealâd in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along,
Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;
These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
For what defence, alas! couldâst thou provide;
Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread;
From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head;
From Greece Iâll guard thee too; for in those lines
The living image of my father shines.â

âThy words, that speak benevolence of mind,
Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoinâd:)
Great are my hazards; but the gods survey
My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way.
Hail, and be blessâd! For scarce of mortal kind
Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind.â

âNor true are all thy words, nor erring wide;
(The sacred messenger of heaven replied;)
But say, conveyâst thou through the lonely plains
What yet most precious of thy store remains,
To lodge in safety with some friendly hand:
Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?
Or fliest thou now?âWhat hopes can Troy retain,
Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?â

The king, alarmâd: âSay what, and whence thou art
Who search the sorrows of a parentâs heart,
And know so well how godlike Hector died?â
Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied:

âYou tempt me, father, and with pity touch:
On this sad subject you inquire too much.
Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector viewâd
In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued:
I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he tossâd
On thousand ships, and witherâd half a host:
I saw, but helpâd not: stern Achillesâ ire
Forbade assistance, and enjoyâd the fire.
For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race;
One ship conveyâd us from our native place;
Polyctor is my sire, an honourâd name,
Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame;
Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast
To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.
To watch this quarter, my adventure falls:
For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls;
Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,
And scarce their rulers check their martial rage.â

âIf then thou art of stern Pelidesâ train,
(The mournful monarch thus rejoinâd again,)
Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid
My sonâs dear relics? what befalls him dead?
Have dogs dismemberâd (on the naked plains),
Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?â

âO favourâd of the skies! (thus answered then
The power that mediates between god and men)
Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent,
But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:
This the twelfth evening since he rested there,
Untouchâd by worms, untainted by the air.
Still as Auroraâs ruddy beam is spread,
Round his friendâs tomb Achilles drags the dead:
Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,
All fresh he lies, with every living grace,
Majestical in death! No stains are found
Oâer all the corse, and closed is every wound,
Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,
Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led
A life so grateful, still regard him dead.â

Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,
And joyful thus the royal sire replied:
âBlest is the man who pays the gods above
The constant tribute of respect and love!
Those who inhabit the Olympian bower
My son forgot not, in exalted power;
And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,
Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,
A pledge of gratitude for Hectorâs sake;
And while the favouring gods our steps survey,
Safe to Pelidesâ tent conduct my way.â

To whom the latent god: âO king, forbear
To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.
But can I, absent from my princeâs sight,
Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light?
What from our masterâs interest thus we draw,
Is but a licensed theft that âscapes the law.
Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence;
And as the crime, I dread the consequence.
Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;
Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way:
On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,
Oâer pathless forests, or the roaring main.â

He said, then took the chariot at a bound,
And snatchâd the reins, and whirlâd the lash around:
Before the inspiring god that urged them on,
The coursers fly with spirit not their own.
And now they reachâd the naval walls, and found
The guards repasting, while the bowls go round;
On these the virtue of his wand he tries,
And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes:
Then heaved the massy gates, removed the bars,
And oâer the trenches led the rolling cars.
Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went,
And now approachâd Pelidesâ lofty tent.
On firs the roof was raised, and coverâd oâer
With reeds collected from the marshy shore;
And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state,
(The work of soldiers,) where the hero sat:
Large was the door, whose well-compacted strength
A solid pine-tree barrâd of wondrous length:
Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty weight,
But great Achilles singly closed the gate.
This Hermes (such the power of gods) set wide;
Then swift alighted the celestial guide,
And thus revealâdââHear, prince! and understand
Thou owâst thy guidance to no mortal hand:
Hermes I am, descended from above,
The king of arts, the messenger of Jove,
Farewell: to shun Achillesâ sight I fly;
Uncommon are such favours of the sky,
Nor stand confessâd to frail mortality.
Now fearless enter, and prefer thy prayers;
Adjure him by his fatherâs silver hairs,
His son, his mother! urge him to bestow
Whatever pity that stern heart can know.â

Thus having said, he vanishâd from his eyes,
And in a moment shot into the skies:
The king, confirmâd from heaven, alighted there,
And left his aged herald on the car,
With solemn pace through various rooms he went,
And found Achilles in his inner tent:
There sat the hero: Alcimus the brave,
And great Automedon, attendance gave:
These served his person at the royal feast;
Around, at awful distance, stood the rest.

Unseen by these, the king his entry made:
And, prostrate now before Achilles laid,
Sudden (a venerable sight!) appears;
Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in tears;
Those direful hands his kisses pressâd, embrued
Even with the best, the dearest of his blood!

As when a wretch (who, conscious of his crime,
Pursued for murder, flies his native clime)
Just gains some frontier, breathless, pale, amazed,
All gaze, all wonder: thus Achilles gazed:
Thus stood the attendants stupid with surprise:
All mute, yet seemâd to question with their eyes:
Each lookâd on other, none the silence broke,
Till thus at last the kingly suppliant spoke:

âAh think, thou favourâd of the powers divine![295]
Think of thy fatherâs age, and pity mine!
In me that fatherâs reverend image trace,
Those silver hairs, that venerable face;
His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!
In all my equal, but in misery!
Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate
Expels him helpless from his peaceful state;
Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly,
And beg protection with a feeble cry.
Yet still one comfort in his soul may rise;
He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes,
And, hearing, still may hope a better day
May send him thee, to chase that foe away.
No comfort to my griefs, no hopes remain,
The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain!
Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came,
The pledge of many a loved and loving dame:
Nineteen one mother boreâDead, all are dead!
How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!
Still one was left their loss to recompense;
His fatherâs hope, his countryâs last defence.
Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel,
Unhappy in his countryâs cause he fell!

âFor him through hostile camps I bent my way,
For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay;
Large gifts proportionâd to thy wrath I bear;
O hear the wretched, and the gods revere!

âThink of thy father, and this face behold!
See him in me, as helpless and as old!
Though not so wretched: there he yields to me,
The first of men in sovereign misery!
Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to embrace
The scourge and ruin of my realm and race;
Suppliant my childrenâs murderer to implore,
And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!â

These words soft pity in the chief inspire,
Touchâd with the dear remembrance of his sire.
Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay)
The old manâs cheek he gently turnâd away.
Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe;
And now the mingled tides together flow:
This low on earth, that gently bending oâer;
A father one, and one a son deplore:
But great Achilles different passions rend,
And now his sire he mourns, and now his friend.
The infectious softness through the heroes ran;
One universal solemn shower began;
They bore as heroes, but they felt as man.

Satiate at length with unavailing woes,
From the high throne divine Achilles rose;
The reverend monarch by the hand he raised;
On his white beard and form majestic gazed,
Not unrelenting; then serene began
With words to soothe the miserable man:

âAlas, what weight of anguish hast thou known,
Unhappy prince! thus guardless and alone
To pass through foes, and thus undaunted face
The man whose fury has destroyâd thy race!
Heaven sure has armâd thee with a heart of steel,
A strength proportionâd to the woes you feel.
Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care:
To mourn avails not: man is born to bear.
Such is, alas! the godsâ severe decree:
They, only they are blest, and only free.
Two urns by Joveâs high throne have ever stood,
The source of evil one, and one of good;
From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
Blessings to these, to those distributes ill;
To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed
To taste the bad unmixâd, is cursed indeed;
Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
The happiest taste not happiness sincere;
But find the cordial draught is dashâd with care.
Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power
What stars concurring blessâd his natal hour!
A realm, a goddess, to his wishes given;
Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven.
One evil yet oâertakes his latest day:
No race succeeding to imperial sway;
An only son; and he, alas! ordainâd
To fall untimely in a foreign land.
See him, in Troy, the pious care decline
Of his weak age, to live the curse of thine!
Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld;
In riches once, in children once excellâd;
Extended Phrygia ownâd thy ample reign,
And all fair Lesbosâ blissful seats contain,
And all wide Hellespontâs unmeasured main.
But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,
And fill thy measure from his bitter urn,
What sees the sun, but hapless heroesâ falls?
War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed
These unavailing sorrows oâer the dead;
Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore,
But thou, alas! mayâst live to suffer more!â

To whom the king: âO favourâd of the skies!
Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies
On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
O give me Hector! to my eyes restore
His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.
Thou, as thou mayâst, these boundless stores enjoy;
Safe mayâst thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;
So shall thy pity and forbearance give
A weak old man to see the light and live!â

âMove me no more, (Achilles thus replies,
While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,)
Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend:
To yield thy Hector I myself intend:
For know, from Jove my goddess-mother came,
(Old Oceanâs daughter, silver-footed dame,)
Nor comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone,
Some god impels with courage not thy own:
No human hand the weighty gates unbarrâd,
Nor could the boldest of our youth have dared
To pass our outworks, or elude the guard.
Cease; lest, neglectful of high Joveâs command,
I show thee, king! thou treadâst on hostile land;
Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give oâer,
And shake the purpose of my soul no more.â

The sire obeyâd him, trembling and oâerawâd.
Achilles, like a lion, rushâd abroad:
Automedon and Alcimus attend,
(Whom most he honourâd, since he lost his friend,)
These to unyoke the mules and horses went,
And led the hoary herald to the tent;
Next, heapâd on high, the numerous presents bear,
(Great Hectorâs ransom,) from the polishâd car.
Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread,
They leave: to cover and enwrap the dead.
Then call the handmaids, with assistant toil
To wash the body and anoint with oil,
Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy sire,
Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire
The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age,
Nor Joveâs command, should check the rising rage.
This done, the garments oâer the corse they spread;
Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed:
Then, while the body on the car they laid,
He groans, and calls on loved Patroclusâ shade:

âIf, in that gloom which never light must know,
The deeds of mortals touch the ghosts below,
O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil
(Restoring Hector) heavenâs unquestionâd will.
The gifts the father gave, be ever thine,
To grace thy manes, and adorn thy shrine.â[296]

He said, and, entering, took his seat of state;
Where full before him reverend Priam sate;
To whom, composed, the godlike chief begun:
âLo! to thy prayer restored, thy breathless son;
Extended on the funeral couch he lies;
And soon as morning paints the eastern skies,
The sight is granted to thy longing eyes:
But now the peaceful hours of sacred night
Demand reflection, and to rest invite:
Nor thou, O father! thus consumed with woe,
The common cares that nourish life forego.
Not thus did Niobe, of form divine,
A parent once, whose sorrows equallâd thine:
Six youthful sons, as many blooming maids,
In one sad day beheld the Stygian shades;
Those by Apolloâs silver bow were slain,
These, Cynthiaâs arrows stretchâd upon the plain:
So was her pride chastised by wrath divine,
Who matchâd her own with bright Latonaâs line;
But two the goddess, twelve the queen enjoyâd;
Those boasted twelve, the avenging two destroyâd.
Steepâd in their blood, and in the dust outspread,
Nine days, neglected, lay exposed the dead;
None by to weep them, to inhume them none;
(For Jove had turnâd the nation all to stone.)
The gods themselves, at length relenting gave
The unhappy race the honours of a grave.
Herself a rock (for such was heavenâs high will)
Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill;
Where round the bed whence Achelous springs,
The watery fairies dance in mazy rings;
There high on Sipylusâs shaggy brow,
She stands, her own sad monument of woe;
The rock for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow.

âSuch griefs, O king! have other parents known;
Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
The care of heaven thy Hector has appearâd,
Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterrâd;
Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drownâd,
And all the eyes of Ilion stream around.â

He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe
With silver fleece, which his attendants slew.
The limbs they sever from the reeking hide,
With skill prepare them, and in parts divide:
Each on the coals the separate morsels lays,
And, hasty, snatches from the rising blaze.
With bread the glittering canisters they load,
Which round the board Automedon bestowâd.
The chief himself to each his portion placed,
And each indulging shared in sweet repast.
When now the rage of hunger was repressâd,
The wondering hero eyes his royal guest:
No less the royal guest the hero eyes,
His godlike aspect and majestic size;
Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage;
And there, the mild benevolence of age.
Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke,
(A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke:

âPermit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep
My careful temples in the dew of sleep:
For, since the day that numberâd with the dead
My hapless son, the dust has been my bed;
Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes;
My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!
Till now, encouraged by the grace you give,
I share thy banquet, and consent to live.â

With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed,
With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread;
Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way,
And place the couches, and the coverings lay.
Then he: âNow, father, sleep, but sleep not here;
Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear,
Lest any Argive, at this hour awake,
To ask our counsel, or our orders take,
Approaching sudden to our openâd tent,
Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent.
Should such report thy honourâd person here,
The king of men the ransom might defer;
But say with speed, if aught of thy desire
Remains unaskâd; what time the rites require
To inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay
Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey.â

âIf then thy will permit (the monarch said)
To finish all due honours to the dead,
This of thy grace accord: to thee are known
The fears of Ilion, closed within her town;
And at what distance from our walls aspire
The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.
Nine days to vent our sorrows I request,
The tenth shall see the funeral and the feast;
The next, to raise his monument be given;
The twelfth we war, if war be doomâd by heaven!â

âThis thy request (replied the chief) enjoy:
Till then our arms suspend the fall of Troy.â

Then gave his hand at parting, to prevent
The old manâs fears, and turnâd within the tent;
Where fair BriseÃ¯s, bright in blooming charms,
Expects her hero with desiring arms.
But in the porch the king and herald rest;
Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.
Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake;
Industrious Hermes only was awake,
The kingâs return revolving in his mind,
To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind.
The power descending hoverâd oâer his head:
âAnd sleepâst thou, father! (thus the vision said:)
Now dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored?
Nor fear the Grecian foes, or Grecian lord?
Thy presence here should stern Atrides see,
Thy still surviving sons may sue for thee;
May offer all thy treasures yet contain,
To spare thy age; and offer all in vain.â

Waked with the word the trembling sire arose,
And raised his friend: the god before him goes:
He joins the mules, directs them with his hand,
And moves in silence through the hostile land.
When now to Xanthusâ yellow stream they drove,
(Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,)
The winged deity forsook their view,
And in a moment to Olympus flew.
Now shed Aurora round her saffron ray,
Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day:
Charged with the mournful load, to Ilion go
The sage and king, majestically slow.
Cassandra first beholds, from Ilionâs spire,
The sad procession of her hoary sire;
Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near,
(Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,)
A shower of tears oâerflows her beauteous eyes,
Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries:

âTurn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,
Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy!
If eâer ye rushâd in crowds, with vast delight,
To hail your hero glorious from the fight,
Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow;
Your common triumph, and your common woe.â

In thronging crowds they issue to the plains;
Nor man nor woman in the walls remains;
In every face the self-same grief is shown;
And Troy sends forth one universal groan.
At Scaeaâs gates they meet the mourning wain,
Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
The wife and mother, frantic with despair,
Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatterâd hair:
Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay;
And there had sighâd and sorrowâd out the day;
But godlike Priam from the chariot rose:
âForbear (he cried) this violence of woes;
First to the palace let the car proceed,
Then pour your boundless sorrows oâer the dead.â

The waves of people at his word divide,
Slow rolls the chariot through the following tide;
Even to the palace the sad pomp they wait:
They weep, and place him on the bed of state.
A melancholy choir attend around,
With plaintive sighs, and musicâs solemn sound:
Alternately they sing, alternate flow
The obedient tears, melodious in their woe.
While deeper sorrows groan from each full heart,
And nature speaks at every pause of art.

First to the corse the weeping consort flew;
Around his neck her milk-white arms she threw,
âAnd oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries)
Snatchâd in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
And I abandonâd, desolate, alone!
An only son, once comfort of our pains,
Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
Never to manly age that son shall rise,
Or with increasing graces glad my eyes:
For Ilion now (her great defender slain)
Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain.
Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
Who saves her infants from the rage of war?
Now hostile fleets must waft those infants oâer
(Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore:
Thou too, my son, to barbarous climes shall go,
The sad companion of thy motherâs woe;
Driven hence a slave before the victorâs sword
Condemnâd to toil for some inhuman lord:
Or else some Greek whose father pressâd the plain,
Or son, or brother, by great Hector slain,
In Hectorâs blood his vengeance shall enjoy,
And hurl thee headlong from the towers of Troy.[297]
For thy stern father never spared a foe:
Thence all these tears, and all this scene of woe!
Thence many evils his sad parents bore,
His parents many, but his consort more.
Why gavâst thou not to me thy dying hand?
And why received not I thy last command?
Some word thou wouldâst have spoke, which, sadly dear,
My soul might keep, or utter with a tear;
Which never, never could be lost in air,
Fixâd in my heart, and oft repeated there!â

Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan,
Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.

The mournful mother next sustains her part:
âO thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!
Of all my race thou most by heaven approved,
And by the immortals even in death beloved!
While all my other sons in barbarous bands
Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands,
This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost,
Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast.
Sentenced, âtis true, by his inhuman doom,
Thy noble corse was draggâd around the tomb;
(The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;)
Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!
Yet glowâst thou fresh with every living grace;
No mark of pain, or violence of face:
Rosy and fair! as PhÅbusâ silver bow
Dismissâd thee gently to the shades below.â

Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears;
Fast from the shining sluices of her eyes
Fall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries.

âAh, dearest friend! in whom the gods had joinâd[298]
The mildest manners with the bravest mind,
Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are oâer
Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore,
(O had I perishâd, ere that form divine
Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!)
Yet was it neâer my fate, from thee to find
A deed ungentle, or a word unkind.
When others cursed the authoress of their woe,
Thy pity checkâd my sorrows in their flow.
If some proud brother eyed me with disdain,
Or scornful sister with her sweeping train,
Thy gentle accents softenâd all my pain.
For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee,
The wretched source of all this misery.
The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;
Sad Helen has no friend, now thou art gone!
Through Troyâs wide streets abandonâd shall I roam!
In Troy deserted, as abhorrâd at home!â

So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye.
Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.
On all around the infectious sorrow grows;
But Priam checkâd the torrent as it rose:
âPerform, ye Trojans! what the rites require,
And fell the forests for a funeral pyre;
Twelve days, nor foes nor secret ambush dread;
Achilles grants these honours to the dead.â[299]


[Illustration: ] FUNERAL OF HECTOR


He spoke, and, at his word, the Trojan train
Their mules and oxen harness to the wain,
Pour through the gates, and fellâd from Idaâs crown,
Roll back the gatherâd forests to the town.
These toils continue nine succeeding days,
And high in air a sylvan structure raise.
But when the tenth fair morn began to shine,
Forth to the pile was borne the man divine,
And placed aloft; while all, with streaming eyes,
Beheld the flames and rolling smokes arise.
Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre streakâd the dewy lawn,
Again the mournful crowds surround the pyre,
And quench with wine the yet remaining fire.
The snowy bones his friends and brothers place
(With tears collected) in a golden vase;
The golden vase in purple palls they rollâd,
Of softest texture, and inwrought with gold.
Last oâer the urn the sacred earth they spread,
And raised the tomb, memorial of the dead.
(Strong guards and spies, till all the rites were done,
Watchâd from the rising to the setting sun.)
All Troy then moves to Priamâs court again,
A solemn, silent, melancholy train:
Assembled there, from pious toil they rest,
And sadly shared the last sepulchral feast.
Such honours Ilion to her hero paid,
And peaceful slept the mighty Hectorâs shade.[300]




CONCLUDING NOTE.


We have now passed through the Iliad, and seen the anger of Achilles,
and the terrible effects of it, at an end: as that only was the subject
of the poem, and the nature of epic poetry would not permit our author
to proceed to the event of the war, it perhaps may be acceptable to the
common reader to give a short account of what happened to Troy and the
chief actors in this poem after the conclusion of it.

I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hector
by the stratagem of the wooden horse, the particulars of which are
described by Virgil in the second book of the Ãneid.

Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of an
arrow in his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii.

The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.

Ajax, after the death of Achilles, had a contest with Ulysses for the
armour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his aim, he slew himself
through indignation.

Helen, after the death of Paris, married Deiphobus his brother, and at
the taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to
Menelaus her first husband, who received her again into favour.

Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murdered by Ãgysthus, at the
instigation of Clytemnestra his wife, who in his absence had
dishonoured his bed with Ãgysthus.

Diomed, after the fall of Troy, was expelled his own country, and
scarce escaped with his life from his adulterous wife ÃgialÃ©; but at
last was received by Daunus in Apulia, and shared his kingdom; it is
uncertain how he died.

Nestor lived in peace with his children, in Pylos, his native country.

Ulysses also, after innumerable troubles by sea and land, at last
returned in safety to Ithaca, which is the subject of Homerâs Odyssey.

For what remains, I beg to be excused from the ceremonies of taking
leave at the end of my work, and from embarrassing myself, or others,
with any defences or apologies about it. But instead of endeavouring to
raise a vain monument to myself, of the merits or difficulties of it
(which must be left to the world, to truth, and to posterity), let me
leave behind me a memorial of my friendship with one of the most
valuable of men, as well as finest writers, of my age and country, one
who has tried, and knows by his own experience, how hard an undertaking
it is to do justice to Homer, and one whom (I am sure) sincerely
rejoices with me at the period of my labours. To him, therefore, having
brought this long work to a conclusion, I desire to dedicate it, and to
have the honour and satisfaction of placing together, in this manner,
the names of Mr. CONGREVE, and of

March 25, 1720

A. POPE


Ton theon de eupoiiaâto mae epi pleon me procophai en poiaetiki kai
allois epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan
euodos proionta.

M. AUREL ANTON _de Seipso_, lib. i. Â§ 17.


END OF THE ILIAD




Footnotes


 [1] âWhat,â says Archdeacon Wilberforce, âis the natural root of
 loyalty as distinguished from such mere selfish desire of personal
 security as is apt to take its place in civilized times, but that
 consciousness of a natural bond among the families of men which gives
 a fellow-feeling to whole clans and nations, and thus enlists their
 affections in behalf of those time-honoured representatives of their
 ancient blood, in whose success they feel a personal interest? Hence
 the delight when we recognize an act of nobility or justice in our
 hereditary princes

ââTuque prior, tu parce genus qui ducis Olympo,
Projice tela manu _sanguis meus_â

âSo strong is this feeling, that it regains an engrafted influence even
when history witnesses that vast convulsions have rent and weakened it
and the Celtic feeling towards the Stuarts has been rekindled in our
own days towards the granddaughter of George the Third of Hanover.
    âSomewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to idolize those
    great lawgivers of manâs race, who have given expression, in the
    immortal language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our
    nature. The thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal
    inheritance of the human race. In this mutual ground every man
    meets his brother, they have been set forth by the providence of
    God to vindicate for all of us what nature could effect, and that,
    in these representatives of our race, we might recognize our common
    benefactors.ââ_Doctrine of the Incarnation_, pp. 9, 10.

 [2] Îá¼°ÎºÎ¿Ï Î´á½³ Î¼Î¹Î½ á¼¦Î½ ÎºÎ±á½¶ Î¼Î½Î·Î¼á½¹ÏÏÎ½Î± Ïá½±Î½ÏÏÎ½ Î³Ïá½±ÏÎµÏÎ¸Î±Î¹. Vit. Hom. in
 Schweigh. Herodot. t. iv. p. 299, sq. Â§ 6. I may observe that this
 Life has been paraphrased in English by my learned young friend
 Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie, and appended to my prose translation of the
 Odyssey. The present abridgement however, will contain all that is of
 use to the reader, for the biographical value of the treatise is most
 insignificant.

 [3] _I.e._ both of composing and reciting verses for as Blair
 observes, âThe first poets sang their own verses.â Sextus Empir. adv.
 Mus. p. 360 ed. Fabric. Îá½ á¼Î¼ÎµÎ»ÎµÎ¹ Î³á½³ ÏÎ¿Î¹ ÎºÎ±á½¶ Î¿á¼° ÏÎ¿Î¹Î·ÏÎ±á½¶ Î¼ÎµÎ»Î¿ÏÎ¿Î¹Î¿á½¶
 Î»á½³Î³Î¿Î½ÏÎ±Î¹, ÎºÎ±á½¶ Ïá½° á½Î¼á½µÏÎ¿Ï á¼ÏÎ· Ïá½¸ Ïá½±Î»Î±Î¹ ÏÏá½¸Ï Î»á½»ÏÎ±Î½ á¼¤Î´ÎµÏÎ¿.
    âThe voice,â observes Heeren, âwas always accompanied by some
 instrument. The bard was provided with a harp on which he played a
 prelude, to elevate and inspire his mind, and with which he
 accompanied the song when begun. His voice probably preserved a medium
 between singing and recitation; the words, and not the melody were
 regarded by the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to remain
 intelligible to all. In countries where nothing similar is found, it
 is difficult to represent such scenes to the mind; but whoever has had
 an opportunity of listening to the improvisation of Italy, can easily
 form an idea of Demodocus and Phemius.ââ_Ancient Greece_, p. 94.

 [4] âShould it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing
 that âpoplars can hardly live so longâ. But setting aside the fact
 that we must not expect consistency in a mere romance, the ancients
 had a superstitious belief in the great age of trees which grew near
 places consecrated by the presence of gods and great men. See Cicero
 de Legg II I, sub init., where he speaks of the plane tree under which
 Socrates used to walk and of the tree at Delos, where Latona gave
 birth to Apollo. This passage is referred to by Stephanus of
 Byzantium, _s. v._ N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinedo. I omit quoting any of
 the dull epigrams ascribed to Homer for, as Mr. Justice Talfourd
 rightly observes, âThe authenticity of these fragments depends upon
 that of the pseudo Herodotean Life of Homer, from which they are
 taken.â Lit of Greece, pp. 38 in Encycl. Metrop. Cf. Coleridge,
 Classic Poets, p. 317.

 [5] It is quoted as the work of Cleobulus, by Diogenes Laert. Vit.
 Cleob. p. 62, ed. Casaub.

 [6] I trust I am justified in employing this as an equivalent for the
 Greek Î»á½³ÏÏÎ±Î¹.

 [7] á½©Ï Îµá¼° ÏÎ¿á½ºÏ á½Î¼á½µÏÎ¿ÏÏ Î´á½¹Î¾ÎµÎ¹ ÏÏá½³ÏÎµÎ¹Î½ Î±á½ÏÎ¿á¿Ï, á½Î¼Î¹Î»Î¿Î½ ÏÎ¿Î»Î»á½¹Î½ ÏÎµ ÎºÎ±Î¹
 á¼ÏÏÎµÎ¿á¿Î½ á¼Î¾Î¿ÏÏÎ¹Î½. á¼Î¹ ÏÎµá¿¦Î¸ÎµÎ½ Î´á½² ÎºÎ±Î¹ ÏÎ¿á½Î½Î¿Î¼Î± á½Î¼Î·ÏÎ¿Ï á¼ÏÎµÎºÏá½±ÏÎ·ÏÎµ Ïá¿·
 ÎÎµÎ»Î·ÏÎ¹Î³ÎµÎ½Îµá¿ á¼Ïá½¸ Ïá¿Ï ÏÏÎ¼ÏÎ¿ÏÎ·Ï. Î¿á¼± Î³á½°Ï ÎÏÎ¼Î±á¿Î¿Î¹ ÏÎ¿á½ºÏ ÏÏÏÎ»Î¿á½ºÏ á½Î¼á½µÏÎ¿ÏÏ
 Î»á½³Î³Î¿ÏÏÎ¹Î½. Vit. Hom. _l. c._ p. 311. The etymology has been condemned
 by recent scholars. See Welcker, Epische Cyclus, p. 127, and
 Mackenzieâs note, p. xiv.

 [8] ÎÎµÏÏÎ¿Ïá½·Î´Î·Ï, Î¸Î½Î·ÏÎ¿á¿ÏÎ¹Î½ á¼Î½Ïá¼·ÏÏÏÎ½ ÏÎ¿Î»Îµá½½Î½ ÏÎµÏ, Î¿á½Î´á½²Î½ á¼ÏÏÎ±ÏÏá½¹ÏÎµÏÎ¿Î½
 Ïá½³Î»ÎµÏÎ±Î¹ Î½á½¹Î¿Ï á¼Î½Î¸Ïá½½ÏÎ¿Î¹ÏÎ¹Î½. Ibid. p. 315. During his stay at PhocÅa,
 Homer is said to have composed the Little Iliad, and the PhocÅid. See
 Mullerâs Hist. of Lit., vi. Â§ 3. Welcker, _l. c._ pp. 132, 272, 358,
 sqq., and Mure, Gr. Lit. vol. ii. p. 284, sq.

 [9] This is so pretty a picture of early manners and hospitality, that
 it is almost a pity to find that it is obviously a copy from the
 Odyssey. See the fourteenth book. In fact, whoever was the author of
 this fictitious biography, he showed some tact in identifying Homer
 with certain events described in his poems, and in eliciting from them
 the germs of something like a personal narrative.

 [10] ÎÎ¹á½° Î»á½¹Î³ÏÎ½ á¼ÏÏÎ¹á¿¶Î½ÏÎ¿. A common metaphor. So Plato calls the parties
 conversing Î´Î±Î¹Ïá½»Î¼Î¿Î½ÎµÏ, or á¼ÏÏÎ¹á½±ÏÎ¿ÏÎµÏ, Tim. i. p. 522 A. Cf. Themist.
 Orat. vi. p. 168, and xvi. p. 374, ed. Petav. So Î´Î¹Î·Î³á½µÎ¼Î±ÏÎ¹ ÏÎ¿ÏÎ¿á¿Ï á½Î¼Î¿á¿¦
 ÎºÎ±á½¶ ÏÎµÏÏÎ½Î¿á¿Ï á¼¡Î´á½·Ï Ïá½´Î½ Î¸Î¿Î¹Î½Î·Î½ ÏÎ¿á¿Ï á¼ÏÏÎ¹ÏÎ¼á½³Î½Î¿Î¹Ï á¼ÏÎ¿á½·ÎµÎ¹, Choricius in
 Fabric. Bibl. Gr. T. viii. P. 851. Î»á½¹Î³Î¿Î¹Ï Î³á½°Ï á¼ÏÏá½·á¾³, AthenÃ¦us vii p
 275, A.

 [11] It was at Bolissus, and in the house of this Chian citizen, that
 Homer is said to have written the Batrachomyomachia, or Battle of the
 Frogs and Mice, the Epicichlidia, and some other minor works.

 [12] Chandler, Travels, vol. i. p. 61, referred to in the Voyage
 Pittoresque dans la GrÃ¨ce, vol. i. P. 92, where a view of the spot is
 given of which the author candidly says,â âJe ne puis rÃ©pondre dâune
 exactitude scrupuleuse dans la vue gÃ©nÃ©rale que jâen donne, car Ã©tant
 allÃ© seul pour lâexaminer je perdis mon crayon, et je fus obligÃ© de
 mâen fier Ã  ma mÃ©moire. Je ne crois cependant pas avoir trop Ã  me
 plaindre dâelle en cette occasion.â

 [13] A more probable reason for this companionship, and for the
 character of Mentor itself, is given by the allegorists, viz.: the
 assumption of Mentorâs form by the guardian deity of the wise Ulysses,
 Minerva. The classical reader may compare Plutarch, Opp. t. ii. p.
 880; _Xyland_. Heraclid. Pont. Alleg. Hom. p. 531-5, of Galeâs Opusc.
 Mythol. Dionys. Halic. de Hom. Poes. c. 15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s. f.

 [14] Vit. Hom. Â§ 28.

 [15] The riddle is given in Section 35. Compare Mackenzieâs note, p.
 xxx.

 [16] Heerenâs Ancient Greece, p. 96.

 [17] Compare Sir E. L. Bulwerâs Caxtons v. i. p. 4.

 [18] Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387.

 [19] Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147.

 [20] Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation of
 which I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.

âOrigias, farewell! and oh! remember me
Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea,
A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,
And ask you, maid, of all the bards you boast,
Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most
Oh! answer all,ââA blind old man and poor
Sweetest he singsâand dwells on Chiosâ rocky shore.ââ

_See_ Thucyd. iii, 104.

 [21] Longin., de Sublim., ix. Â§ 26. á½Î¸ÎµÎ½ á¼Î½ Ïá¿ á½Î´ÏÏÏÎµá½·á¾³ ÏÎ±ÏÎµÎ¹Îºá½±ÏÎ±Î¹ ÏÎ¹Ï
 á¼Î½ ÎºÎ±ÏÎ±Î´ÏÎ¿Î¼á½³Î½á¿³ Ïá½¸Î½ á½Î¼Î·ÏÎ¿Î½ á¼¡Î»á½·á¿³, Î¿Î´ Î´á½·ÏÎ± Ïá¿Ï ÏÏÎ¿Î´Ïá½¹ÏÎ·ÏÎ¿Ï ÏÎ±ÏÎ±Î¼á½³Î½ÎµÎ¹ ÏÎ¿
 Î¼á½³Î³ÎµÎ¸Î¿Ï.

 [22] See Tatian, quoted in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr.
 Mackenzie has given three brief but elaborate papers on the different
 writers on the subject, which deserve to be consulted. See Notes and
 Queries, vol. v. pp. 99, 171, and 221. His own views are moderate, and
 perhaps as satisfactory, on the whole, as any of the hypotheses
 hitherto put forth. In fact, they consist in an attempt to blend those
 hypotheses into something like consistency, rather than in advocating
 any individual theory.

 [23] Letters to Phileleuth; Lips.

 [24] Hist. of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq.

 [25] It is, indeed not easy to calculate the height to which the
 memory may be cultivated. To take an ordinary case, we might refer to
 that of any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short
 warning, to ârhapsodize,â night after night, parts which when laid
 together, would amount to an immense number of lines. But all this is
 nothing to two instances of our own day. Visiting at Naples a
 gentleman of the highest intellectual attainments, and who held a
 distinguished rank among the men of letters in the last century, he
 informed us that the day before he had passed much time in examining a
 man, not highly educated, who had learned to repeat the whole
 Gierusalemme of Tasso, not only to recite it consecutively, but also
 to repeat those stanzas in utter defiance of the sense, either
 forwards or backwards, or from the eighth line to the first,
 alternately the odd and even linesâin short, whatever the passage
 required; the memory, which seemed to cling to the words much more
 than to the sense, had it at such perfect command, that it could
 produce it under any form. Our informant went on to state that this
 singular being was proceeding to learn the Orlando Furioso in the same
 manner. But even this instance is less wonderful than one as to which
 we may appeal to any of our readers that happened some twenty years
 ago to visit the town of Stirling, in Scotland. No such person can
 have forgotten the poor, uneducated man Blind Jamie who could actually
 repeat, after a few minutes consideration any verse required from any
 part of the Bibleâeven the obscurest and most unimportant enumeration
 of mere proper names not excepted. We do not mention these facts as
 touching the more difficult part of the question before us, but facts
 they are; and if we find so much difficulty in calculating the extent
 to which the mere memory may be cultivated, are we, in these days of
 multifarious reading, and of countless distracting affairs, fair
 judges of the perfection to which the invention and the memory
 combined may attain in a simpler age, and among a more single minded
 people?âQuarterly Review, _l. c._, p. 143, sqq.
    Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, âThe
    Dschungariade of the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer
    in length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit, and yet it
    exists only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted
    with writing. But the songs of a nation are probably the last
    things which are committed to writing, for the very reason that
    they are remembered.ââ _Ancient Greece_. p. 100.

 [26] Vol. II p. 198, sqq.

 [27] Quarterly Review, _l. c._, p. 131 sq.

 [28] Betrachtungen Ã¼ber die Ilias. Berol. 1841. See Grote, p. 204.
 Notes and Queries, vol. v. p. 221.

 [29] Prolegg. pp. xxxii., xxxvi., &c.

 [30] Vol. ii. p. 214 sqq.

 [31] âWho,â says Cicero, de Orat. iii. 34, âwas more learned in that
 age, or whose eloquence is reported to have been more perfected by
 literature than that of Peisistratus, who is said first to have
 disposed the books of Homer in the order in which we now have them?â
 Compare Wolfâs Prolegomena 33, Â§.

 [32] âThe first book, together with the eighth, and the books from the
 eleventh to the twenty-second inclusive, seems to form the primary
 organization of the poem, then properly an AchilleÃ¯s.ââGrote, vol. ii.
 p. 235

 [33] K. R. H. Mackenzie, Notes and Queries, p. 222 sqq.

 [34] See his Epistle to Raphelingius, in Schroederâs edition, 4to.,
 Delphis, 1728.

 [35] Ancient Greece, p. 101.

 [36] The best description of this monument will be found in Vauxâs
 âAntiquities of the British Museum,â p. 198 sq. The monument itself
 (Towneley Sculptures, No. 123) is well known.

 [37] Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 276.

 [38] Preface to her Homer.

 [39] Hesiod. Opp. et Dier. Lib. I. vers. 155, &c.

 [40] The following argument of the Iliad, corrected in a few
 particulars, is translated from BitaubÃ©, and is, perhaps, the neatest
 summary that has ever been drawn up:ââA hero, injured by his general,
 and animated with a noble resentment, retires to his tent; and for a
 season withdraws himself and his troops from the war. During this
 interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has been
 occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of
 which the honour of their country depends. The general, at length
 opening his eyes to the fault which he had committed, deputes the
 principal officers of his army to the incensed hero, with commission
 to make compensation for the injury, and to tender magnificent
 presents. The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his character,
 persists in his animosity; the army is again defeated, and is on the
 verge of entire destruction. This inexorable man has a friend; this
 friend weeps before him, and asks for the heroâs arms, and for
 permission to go to the war in his stead. The eloquence of friendship
 prevails more than the intercession of the ambassadors or the gifts of
 the general. He lends his armour to his friend, but commands him not
 to engage with the chief of the enemyâs army, because he reserves to
 himself the honour of that combat, and because he also fears for his
 friendâs life. The prohibition is forgotten; the friend listens to
 nothing but his courage; his corpse is brought back to the hero, and
 the heroâs arms become the prize of the conqueror. Then the hero,
 given up to the most lively despair, prepares to fight; he receives
 from a divinity new armour, is reconciled with his general and,
 thirsting for glory and revenge, enacts prodigies of valour, recovers
 the victory, slays the enemyâs chief, honours his friend with superb
 funeral rites, and exercises a cruel vengeance on the body of his
 destroyer; but finally appeased by the tears and prayers of the father
 of the slain warrior, restores to the old man the corpse of his son,
 which he buries with due solemnities.ââColeridge, p. 177, sqq.

 [41] Vultures: Pope is more accurate than the poet he translates, for
 Homer writes âa prey to dogs and to _all_ kinds of birds. But all
 kinds of birds are not carnivorous.

 [42] _i.e._ during the whole time of their striving the will of Jove
 was being gradually accomplished.

 [43] Compare Miltonâs âParadise Lostâ i. 6

âSing, heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
Of Horeb, or of Sinai, didst inspire
That shepherd.â

 [44] _Latonaâs son: i.e._ Apollo.

 [45] _King of men:_ Agamemnon.

 [46] _Brother kings:_ Menelaus and Agamemnon.

 [47] _Smintheus_ an epithet taken from sminthos, the Phrygian name
 for a _mouse_, was applied to Apollo for having put an end to a plague
 of mice which had harassed that territory. Strabo, however, says, that
 when the Teucri were migrating from Crete, they were told by an oracle
 to settle in that place, where they should not be attacked by the
 original inhabitants of the land, and that, having halted for the
 night, a number of field-mice came and gnawed away the leathern straps
 of their baggage, and thongs of their armour. In fulfilment of the
 oracle, they settled on the spot, and raised a temple to Sminthean
 Apollo. Grote, âHistory of Greece,â i. p. 68, remarks that the
 âworship of Sminthean Apollo, in various parts of the Troad and its
 neighboring territory, dates before the earliest period of Ãolian
 colonization.â

 [48] _Cilla_, a town of Troas near Thebe, so called from Cillus, a
 sister of Hippodamia, slain by Ånomaus.

 [49] A mistake. It should be,

âIf eâer I roofed thy graceful fane,â

for the custom of decorating temples with garlands was of later date.

 [50] _Bent was his bow_ âThe Apollo of Homer, it must be borne in
 mind, is a different character from the deity of the same name in the
 later classical pantheon. Throughout both poems, all deaths from
 unforeseen or invisible causes, the ravages of pestilence, the fate of
 the young child or promising adult, cut off in the germ of infancy or
 flower of youth, of the old man dropping peacefully into the grave, or
 of the reckless sinner suddenly checked in his career of crime, are
 ascribed to the arrows of Apollo or Diana. The oracular functions of
 the god rose naturally out of the above fundamental attributes, for
 who could more appropriately impart to mortals what little
 foreknowledge Fate permitted of her decrees than the agent of her most
 awful dispensations? The close union of the arts of prophecy and song
 explains his additional office of god of music, while the arrows with
 which he and his sister were armed, symbols of sudden death in every
 age, no less naturally procured him that of god of archery. Of any
 connection between Apollo and the Sun, whatever may have existed in
 the more esoteric doctrine of the Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace
 in either Iliad or Odyssey.ââMure, âHistory of Greek Literature,â vol.
 i. p. 478, sq.

 [51] It has frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin with
 animals, and that Homer had this fact in mind.

 [52] _Convened to council_. The public assembly in the heroic times is
 well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92. âIt is an assembly for
 talk. Communication and discussion to a certain extent by the chiefs
 in person, of the people as listeners and sympathizersâoften for
 eloquence, and sometimes for quarrelâbut here its ostensible purposes
 end.â

 [53] Old Jacob Duport, whose âGnomologia Homericaâ is full of curious
 and useful things, quotes several passages of the ancients, in which
 reference is made to these words of Homer, in maintenance of the
 belief that dreams had a divine origin and an import in which men were
 interested.

 [54] Rather, âbright-eyed.â See the German critics quoted by Arnold.

 [55] The prize given to Ajax was Tecmessa, while Ulysses received
 Laodice, the daughter of Cycnus.

 [56] The Myrmidons dwelt on the southern borders of Thessaly, and took
 their origin from Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. It is
 fancifully supposed that the name was derived from myrmaex, an _ant_,
 âbecause they imitated the diligence of the ants, and like them were
 indefatigable, continually employed in cultivating the earth; the
 change from ants to men is founded merely on the equivocation of their
 name, which resembles that of the ant: they bore a further resemblance
 to these little animals, in that instead of inhabiting towns or
 villages, at first they commonly resided in the open fields, having no
 other retreats but dens and the cavities of trees, until Ithacus
 brought them together, and settled them in more secure and comfortable
 habitations.ââAnthonâs âLempriere.â

 [57] Eustathius, after Heraclides Ponticus and others, allegorizes
 this apparition, as if the appearance of Minerva to Achilles, unseen
 by the rest, was intended to point out the sudden recollection that he
 would gain nothing by intemperate wrath, and that it were best to
 restrain his anger, and only gratify it by withdrawing his services.
 The same idea is rather cleverly worked out by Apuleius, âDe Deo
 Socratis.â

 [58] Compare Milton, âParadise Lost,â bk. ii:

âThough his tongue
Droppâd manna.â

So Proverbs v. 3, âFor the lips of a strange woman drop as an
honey-comb.â

 [59] Salt water was chiefly used in lustrations, from its being
 supposed to possess certain fiery particles. Hence, if sea-water could
 not be obtained, salt was thrown into the fresh water to be used for
 the lustration. Menander, in Clem. Alex. vii. p.713, hydati
 perriranai, embalon alas, phakois.

 [60] The persons of heralds were held inviolable, and they were at
 liberty to travel whither they would without fear of molestation.
 Pollux, Onom. viii. p. 159. The office was generally given to old men,
 and they were believed to be under the especial protection of Jove and
 Mercury.

 [61] His mother, Thetis, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, who was
 courted by Neptune and Jupiter. When, however, it was known that the
 son to whom she would give birth must prove greater than his father,
 it was determined to wed her to a mortal, and Peleus, with great
 difficulty, succeeded in obtaining her hand, as she eluded him by
 assuming various forms. Her children were all destroyed by fire
 through her attempts to see whether they were immortal, and Achilles
 would have shared the same fate had not his father rescued him. She
 afterwards rendered him invulnerable by plunging him into the waters
 of the Styx, with the exception of that part of the heel by which she
 held him. Hygin. Fab. 54

 [62] ThebÃ© was a city of Mysia, north of Adramyttium.

 [63] That is, defrauds me of the prize allotted me by their votes.

 [64] Quintus Calaber goes still further in his account of the service
 rendered to Jove by Thetis:

âNay more, the fetters of Almighty Jove
She loosedââDyceâs âCalaber,â s. 58.

 [65] _To Fates averse_. Of the gloomy destiny reigning throughout the
 Homeric poems, and from which even the gods are not exempt, Schlegel
 well observes, âThis power extends also to the world of godsâ for the
 Grecian gods are mere powers of natureâand although immeasurably
 higher than mortal man, yet, compared with infinitude, they are on an
 equal footing with himself.âââLectures on the Dramaâ v. p. 67.

 [66] It has been observed that the annual procession of the sacred
 ship so often represented on Egyptian monuments, and the return of the
 deity from Ethiopia after some daysâ absence, serves to show the
 Ethiopian origin of Thebes, and of the worship of Jupiter Ammon. âI
 think,â says Heeren, after quoting a passage from Diodorus about the
 holy ship, âthat this procession is represented in one of the great
 sculptured reliefs on the temple of Karnak. The sacred ship of Ammon
 is on the shore with its whole equipment, and is towed along by
 another boat. It is therefore on its voyage. This must have been one
 of the most celebrated festivals, since, even according to the
 interpretation of antiquity, Homer alludes to it when he speaks of
 Jupiterâs visit to the Ethiopians, and his twelve daysâ
 absence.ââLong, âEgyptian Antiquitiesâ vol. 1 p. 96. Eustathius, vol.
 1 p. 98, sq. (ed. Basil) gives this interpretation, and likewise an
 allegorical one, which we will spare the reader.

 [67] _Atoned_, i.e. reconciled. This is the proper and most natural
 meaning of the word, as may be seen from Taylorâs remarks in Calmetâs
 Dictionary, p.110, of my edition.

 [68] That is, drawing back their necks while they cut their throats.
 âIf the sacrifice was in honour of the celestial gods, the throat was
 bent upwards towards heaven; but if made to the heroes, or infernal
 deities, it was killed with its throat toward the ground.ââ âElgin
 Marbles,â vol i. p.81.

âThe jolly crew, unmindful of the past,
The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste,
Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil;
The limbs yet trembling, in the caldrons boil;
Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil.
Stretchâd on the grassy turf, at ease they dine,
Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with wine.â

Drydenâs âVirgil,â i. 293.

 [69] _Crownâd, i.e._ filled to the brim. The custom of adorning
 goblets with flowers was of later date.

 [70] _He spoke_, &c. âWhen a friend inquired of Phidias what pattern
 he had formed his Olympian Jupiter, he is said to have answered by
 repeating the lines of the first Iliad in which the poet represents
 the majesty of the god in the most sublime terms; thereby signifying
 that the genius of Homer had inspired him with it. Those who beheld
 this statue are said to have been so struck with it as to have asked
 whether Jupiter had descended from heaven to show himself to Phidias,
 or whether Phidias had been carried thither to contemplate the god.ââ
 âElgin Marbles,â vol. xii p.124.

 [71] âSo was his will
Pronounced among the gods, and by an oath,
That shook heavânâs whole circumference, confirmâd.â

âParadise Lostâ ii. 351.

 [72] _A double bowl, i.e._ a vessel with a cup at both ends, something
 like the measures by which a halfpenny or pennyworth of nuts is sold.
 See Buttmann, Lexic. p. 93 sq.

 [73] âParadise Lost,â i. 44.

âHim thâ Almighty power
Hurlâd headlong flaming from th ethereal sky,
With hideous ruin and combustionâ

 [74] The occasion on which Vulcan incurred Joveâs displeasure was
 thisâAfter Hercules, had taken and pillaged Troy, Juno raised a storm,
 which drove him to the island of Cos, having previously cast Jove into
 a sleep, to prevent him aiding his son. Jove, in revenge, fastened
 iron anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and Vulcan,
 attempting to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in the manner
 described. The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep explanations
 for this amusing fiction. See Heraclides, âPonticus,â p. 463 sq., ed
 Gale. The story is told by Homer himself in Book xv. The Sinthians
 were a race of robbers, the ancient inhabitants of Lemnos which island
 was ever after sacred to Vulcan.

âNor was his name unheard or unadored
In ancient Greece, and in Ausonian land
Men callâd him Mulciber, and how he fell
From heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer oâer the crystal battlements from morn
To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
A summerâs day and with the setting sun
Droppâd from the zenith like a falling star
On Lemnos, thâ Aegean isle thus they relate.â

âParadise Lost,â i. 738

 [75] It is ingeniously observed by Grote, vol i p. 463, that âThe gods
 formed a sort of political community of their own which had its
 hierarchy, its distribution of ranks and duties, its contentions for
 power and occasional revolutions, its public meetings in the agora of
 Olympus, and its multitudinous banquets or festivals.â

 [76] Plato, Rep. iii. p. 437, was so scandalized at this deception of
 Jupiterâs, and at his other attacks on the character of the gods, that
 he would fain sentence him to an honourable banishment. (See Minucius
 Felix, Section 22.) Coleridge, Introd. p. 154, well observes, that the
 supreme father of gods and men had a full right to employ a lying
 spirit to work out his ultimate will. Compare âParadise Lost,â v. 646:

âAnd roseate dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest.â

 [77] â_Dream_ ought to be spelt with a capital letter, being, I think,
 evidently personified as the god of dreams. See Anthon and others.

âWhen, by Minerva sent, a _fraudful_ Dream
Rushâd from the skies, the bane of her and Troy.â

Dyceâs âSelect Translations from Quintus Calaber,â p.10.

 [78] âSleepâst thou, companion dear, what sleep can close
Thy eye-lids?âââParadise Lost,â v. 673.

 [79] This truly military sentiment has been echoed by the approving
 voice of many a general and statesman of antiquity. See Plinyâs
 Panegyric on Trajan. Silius neatly translates it,

âTurpe duci totam somno consumere noctem.â

 [80] _The same in habit_, &c.

âTo whom once more the winged god appears;
His former youthful mien and shape he wears.â

Drydenâs Virgil, iv. 803.

 [81] âAs bees in spring-time, when
The sun with Taurus rides,
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed plank,
The suburb of this straw-built citadel,
New-nibbâd with balm, expatiate and confer
Their state affairs. So thick the very crowd
Swarmâd and were straitenâd.âââParadise Lostâ i. 768.

 [82] It was the heraldâs duty to make the people sit down. âA
 _standing_ agora is a symptom of manifest terror (II. Xviii. 246) an
 evening agora, to which men came elevated by wine, is also the
 forerunner of mischief (âOdyssey,â iii. 138).ââGrote, ii. p. 91,
 _note_.

 [83] This sceptre, like that of Judah (Genesis xlix. 10), is a type of
 the supreme and far-spread dominion of the house of the Atrides. See
 Thucydides i. 9. âIt is traced through the hands of Hermes, he being
 the wealth giving god, whose blessing is most efficacious in
 furthering the process of acquisition.ââGrote, i. p. 212. Compare
 Quintus Calaber (Dyceâs Selections, p. 43).

âThus the monarch spoke,
Then pledged the chief in a capacious cup,
Golden, and framed by art divine (a gift
Which to Almighty Jove lame Vulcan brought
Upon his nuptial day, when he espoused
The Queen of Love), the sire of gods bestowâd
The cup on Dardanus, who gave it next
To Ericthonius Tros received it then,
And left it, with his wealth, to be possessâd
By Ilus he to great Laomedon
Gave it, and last to Priamâs lot it fell.â

 [84] Grote, i, p. 393, states the number of the Grecian forces at
 upwards of 100,000 men. Nichols makes a total of 135,000.

 [85] âAs thick as when a field
Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends
His bearded grove of ears, which way the wind
Sways them.ââParadise Lost,â iv. 980, sqq.

 [86] This sentiment used to be a popular one with some of the greatest
 tyrants, who abused it into a pretext for unlimited usurpation of
 power. Dion, Caligula, and Domitian were particularly fond of it, and,
 in an extended form, we find the maxim propounded by Creon in the
 Antigone of Sophocles. See some important remarks of Heeren, âAncient
 Greece,â ch. vi. p. 105.

 [87] It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting
 and contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the disposition
 of Ulysses in a new light, in which mere cunning is less prominent. Of
 the gradual and individual development of Homerâs heroes, Schlegel
 well observes, âIn bas-relief the figures are usually in profile, and
 in the epos all are characterized in the simplest manner in relief;
 they are not grouped together, but follow one another; so Homerâs
 heroes advance, one by one, in succession before us. It has been
 remarked that the _Iliad_ is not definitively closed, but that we are
 left to suppose something both to precede and to follow it. The
 bas-relief is equally without limit, and may be continued _ad
 infinitum_, either from before or behind, on which account the
 ancients preferred for it such subjects as admitted of an indefinite
 extension, sacrificial processions, dances, and lines of combatants,
 and hence they also exhibit bas-reliefs on curved surfaces, such as
 vases, or the frieze of a rotunda, where, by the curvature, the two
 ends are withdrawn from our sight, and where, while we advance, one
 object appears as another disappears. Reading Homer is very much like
 such a circuit; the present object alone arresting our attention, we
 lose sight of what precedes, and do not concern ourselves about what
 is to follow.âââDramatic Literature,â p. 75.

 [88] âThere cannot be a clearer indication than this description âso
 graphic in the original poemâof the true character of the Homeric
 agora. The multitude who compose it are listening and acquiescent, not
 often hesitating, and never refractory to the chief. The fate which
 awaits a presumptuous critic, even where his virulent reproaches are
 substantially well-founded, is plainly set forth in the treatment of
 Thersites; while the unpopularity of such a character is attested even
 more by the excessive pains which Homer takes to heap upon him
 repulsive personal deformities, than by the chastisement of Odysseus
 he is lame, bald, crook-backed, of misshapen head, and squinting
 vision.ââGrote, vol. i. p. 97.

 [89] According to Pausanias, both the sprig and the remains of the
 tree were exhibited in his time. The tragedians, Lucretius and others,
 adopted a different fable to account for the stoppage at Aulis, and
 seem to have found the sacrifice of Iphigena better suited to form the
 subject of a tragedy. Compare Drydenâs âÃneid,â vol. iii. sqq.

 [90] _Full of his god, i.e._, Apollo, filled with the prophetic
 spirit. â_The_ godâ would be more simple and emphatic.

 [91] Those critics who have maintained that the âCatalogue of Shipsâ
 is an interpolation, should have paid more attention to these lines,
 which form a most natural introduction to their enumeration.

 [92] The following observation will be useful to Homeric readers:
 âParticular animals were, at a later time, consecrated to particular
 deities. To Jupiter, Ceres, Juno, Apollo, and Bacchus victims of
 advanced age might be offered. An ox of five years old was considered
 especially acceptable to Jupiter. A black bull, a ram, or a boar pig,
 were offerings for Neptune. A heifer, or a sheep, for Minerva. To
 Ceres a sow was sacrificed, as an enemy to corn. The goat to Bacchus,
 because he fed on vines. Diana was propitiated with a stag; and to
 Venus the dove was consecrated. The infernal and evil deities were to
 be appeased with black victims. The most acceptable of all sacrifices
 was the heifer of a year old, which had never borne the yoke. It was
 to be perfect in every limb, healthy, and without blemish.âââElgin
 Marbles,â vol. i. p. 78.

 [93] _Idomeneus_, son of Deucalion, was king of Crete. Having vowed,
 during a tempest, on his return from Troy, to sacrifice to Neptune the
 first creature that should present itself to his eye on the Cretan
 shore, his son fell a victim to his rash vow.

 [94] _Tydeusâ son, i.e._ Diomed.

 [95] That is, Ajax, the son of Oileus, a Locrian. He must be
 distinguished from the other, who was king of Salamis.

 [96] A great deal of nonsense has been written to account for the word
 _unbid_, in this line. Even Plato, âSympos.â p. 315, has found some
 curious meaning in what, to us, appears to need no explanation. Was
 there any _heroic_ rule of etiquette which prevented one brother-king
 visiting another without a formal invitation?

 [97] Fresh water fowl, especially swans, were found in great numbers
 about the Asian Marsh, a fenny tract of country in Lydia, formed by
 the river Cayster, near its mouth. See Virgil, âGeorgics,â vol. i.
 383, sq.

 [98] _Scamander_, or Scamandros, was a river of Troas, rising,
 according to Strabo, on the highest part of Mount Ida, in the same
 hill with the Granicus and the OEdipus, and falling into the sea at
 Sigaeum; everything tends to identify it with Mendere, as Wood,
 Rennell, and others maintain; the Mendere is 40 miles long, 300 feet
 broad, deep in the time of flood, nearly dry in the summer. Dr. Clarke
 successfully combats the opinion of those who make the Scamander to
 have arisen from the springs of Bounabarshy, and traces the source of
 the river to the highest mountain in the chain of Ida, now Kusdaghy;
 receives the Simois in its course; towards its mouth it is very muddy,
 and flows through marshes. Between the Scamander and Simois, Homerâs
 Troy is supposed to have stood: this river, according to Homer, was
 called Xanthus by the gods, Scamander by men. The waters of the
 Scamander had the singular property of giving a beautiful colour to
 the hair or wool of such animals as bathed in them; hence the three
 goddesses, Minerva, Juno, and Venus, bathed there before they appeared
 before Paris to obtain the golden apple: the name Xanthus, âyellow,â
 was given to the Scamander, from the peculiar colour of its waters,
 still applicable to the Mendere, the yellow colour of whose waters
 attracts the attention of travellers.

 [99] It should be âhis _chest_ like Neptune.â The torso of Neptune, in
 the âElgin Marbles,â No. 103, (vol. ii. p. 26,) is remarkable for its
 breadth and massiveness of development.

 [100] âSay first, for heavân hides nothing from thy view.âââParadise
 Lost,â i. 27.

âMa diâ tu, Musa, come i primi danni
Mandassero Ã  Cristiani, e di quai parti:
Tu âl sai; ma di tantâ opra a noi si lunge
Debil aura di fama appena giunge.âââGier. Lib.â iv. 19.

 [101] âThe Catalogue is, perhaps, the portion of the poem in favour of
 which a claim to separate authorship has been most plausibly urged.
 Although the example of Homer has since rendered some such formal
 enumeration of the forces engaged, a common practice in epic poems
 descriptive of great warlike adventures, still so minute a statistical
 detail can neither be considered as imperatively required, nor perhaps
 such as would, in ordinary cases, suggest itself to the mind of a
 poet. Yet there is scarcely any portion of the Iliad where both
 historical and internal evidence are more clearly in favour of a
 connection from the remotest period, with the remainder of the work.
 The composition of the Catalogue, whensoever it may have taken place,
 necessarily presumes its authorâs acquaintance with a previously
 existing Iliad. It were impossible otherwise to account for the
 harmony observable in the recurrence of so vast a number of proper
 names, most of them historically unimportant, and not a few altogether
 fictitious: or of so many geographical and genealogical details as are
 condensed in these few hundred lines, and incidentally scattered over
 the thousands which follow: equally inexplicable were the pointed
 allusions occurring in this episode to events narrated in the previous
 and subsequent text, several of which could hardly be of traditional
 notoriety, but through the medium of the Iliad.ââMure, âLanguage and
 Literature of Greece,â vol. i. p. 263.

 [102] _Twice Sixty:_ âThucydides observes that the BÅotian vessels,
 which carried one hundred and twenty men each, were probably meant to
 be the largest in the fleet, and those of Philoctetes, carrying fifty
 each, the smallest. The average would be eighty-five, and Thucydides
 supposes the troops to have rowed and navigated themselves; and that
 very few, besides the chiefs, went as mere passengers or landsmen. In
 short, we have in the Homeric descriptions the complete picture of an
 Indian or African war canoe, many of which are considerably larger
 than the largest scale assigned to those of the Greeks. If the total
 number of the Greek ships be taken at twelve hundred, according to
 Thucydides, although in point of fact there are only eleven hundred
 and eighty-six in the Catalogue, the amount of the army, upon the
 foregoing average, will be about a hundred and two thousand men. The
 historian considers this a small force as representing all Greece.
 Bryant, comparing it with the allied army at Platae, thinks it so
 large as to prove the entire falsehood of the whole story; and his
 reasonings and calculations are, for their curiosity, well worth a
 careful perusal.ââColeridge, p. 211, sq.

 [103] The mention of Corinth is an anachronism, as that city was
 called Ephyre before its capture by the Dorians. But Velleius, vol. i.
 p. 3, well observes, that the poet would naturally speak of various
 towns and cities by the names by which they were known in his own
 time.

 [104] âAdam, the goodliest man of men since born, His sons, the
 fairest of her daughters Eve.âââParadise Lost,â iv. 323.

 [105] _Ãsetesâ tomb_. Monuments were often built on the sea-coast, and
 of a considerable height, so as to serve as watch-towers or land
 marks. See my notes to my prose translations of the âOdyssey,â ii. p.
 21, or on Eur. âAlcest.â vol. i. p. 240.

 [106] _Zeleia_, another name for Lycia. The inhabitants were greatly
 devoted to the worship of Apollo. See Muller, âDorians,â vol. i. p.
 248.

 [107] _Barbarous tongues_. âVarious as were the dialects of the
 Greeksâand these differences existed not only between the several
 tribes, but even between neighbouring citiesâthey yet acknowledged in
 their language that they formed but one nation were but branches of
 the same family. Homer has âmen of other tongues:â and yet Homer had
 no general name for the Greek nation.ââHeeren, âAncient Greece,â
 Section vii. p. 107, sq.

 [108] _The cranes_.
âMarking the tracts of air, the clamorous cranes
Wheel their due flight in varied ranks descried:
And each with outstretchâd neck his rank maintains,
In marshallâd order through thâ ethereal void.â

Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoeâs Life, Appendix.

See Caryâs Dante: âHell,â canto v.

 [109] _Silent, breathing rage._
âThus they,
Breathing united force with fixed thought,
Moved on in silence.â

âParadise Lost,â book i. 559.

 [110] âAs when some peasant in a bushy brake
Has with unwary footing pressâd a snake;
He starts aside, astonishâd, when he spies
His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyesâ

Drydenâs Virgil, ii. 510.

 [111] Dysparis, _i.e._ unlucky, ill fated, Paris. This alludes to the
 evils which resulted from his having been brought up, despite the
 omens which attended his birth.

 [112] The following scene, in which Homer has contrived to introduce
 so brilliant a sketch of the Grecian warriors, has been imitated by
 Euripides, who in his âPhoenissaeâ represents Antigone surveying the
 opposing champions from a high tower, while the paedagogus describes
 their insignia and details their histories.

 [113] _No wonder_, &c. Zeuxis, the celebrated artist, is said to have
 appended these lines to his picture of Helen, as a motto. Valer Max.
 iii. 7.

 [114] The early epic was largely occupied with the exploits and
 sufferings of women, or heroines, the wives and daughters of the
 Grecian heroes. A nation of courageous, hardy, indefatigable women,
 dwelling apart from men, permitting only a short temporary
 intercourse, for the purpose of renovating their numbers, burning out
 their right breast with a view of enabling themselves to draw the bow
 freely; this was at once a general type, stimulating to the fancy of
 the poet, and a theme eminently popular with his hearers. We find
 these warlike females constantly reappearing in the ancient poems, and
 universally accepted as past realities in the Iliad. When Priam wishes
 to illustrate emphatically the most numerous host in which he ever
 found himself included, he tells us that it was assembled in Phrygia,
 on the banks of the Sangarius, for the purpose of resisting the
 formidable Amazons. When Bellerophon is to be employed in a deadly and
 perilous undertaking, by those who prudently wished to procure his
 death, he is despatched against the Amazons.âGrote, vol. i p. 289.

 [115] _Antenor_, like Ãneas, had always been favourable to the
 restoration of Helen. Liv 1. 2.

 [116]
âHis labâring heart with sudden rapture seized
He pausâd, and on the ground in silence gazed.
Unskillâd and uninspired he seems to stand,
Nor lifts the eye, nor graceful moves the hand:
Then, while the chiefs in still attention hung,
Pours the full tide of eloquence along;
While from his lips the melting torrent flows,
Soft as the fleeces of descending snows.
Now stronger notes engage the listening crowd,
Louder the accents rise, and yet more loud,
Like thunders rolling from a distant cloud.â

Merrickâs âTryphiodorus,â 148, 99.

 [117] Duport, âGnomol. Homer,â p. 20, well observes that this
 comparison may also be sarcastically applied to the _frigid_ style of
 oratory. It, of course, here merely denotes the ready fluency of
 Ulysses.

 [118] _Her brothersâ doom_. They perished in combat with Lynceus and
 Idas, whilst besieging Sparta. See Hygin. Poet Astr. 32, 22. Virgil
 and others, however, make them share immortality by turns.

 [119] Idreus was the arm-bearer and charioteer of king Priam, slain
 during this war. Cf. Ãn, vi. 487.

 [120] _ScÃ¦aâs gates_, rather _ScÃ¦an gates_, _i.e._ the left-hand
 gates.

 [121] This was customary in all sacrifices. Hence we find Iras
 descending to cut off the hair of Dido, before which she could not
 expire.

 [122] _Nor pierced_.

âThis said, his feeble hand a javâlin threw,
Which, fluttâring, seemed to loiter as it flew,
Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield.â

Drydenâs Virgil, ii. 742.

 [123] _Revealâd the queen_.

âThus having said, she turnâd and made appear
Her neck refulgent and dishevellâd hair,
Which, flowing from her shoulders, reachâd the ground,
And widely spread ambrosial scents around.
In length of train descends her sweeping gown;
And, by her graceful walk, the queen of love is known.â

Drydenâs Virgil, i. 556.

 [124] _Cranaeâs isle, i.e._ Athens. See the âSchol.â and Albertiâs
 âHesychius,â vol. ii. p. 338. This name was derived from one of its
 early kings, Cranaus.

 [125] _The martial maid_. In the original, âMinerva Alalcomeneis,â
 _i.e. the defender_, so called from her temple at Alalcomene in
 BÅotia.

 [126] âAnything for a quiet life!â

 [127] â_Argos_. The worship of Juno at Argos was very celebrated in
 ancient times, and she was regarded as the patron deity of that city.
 Apul. Met., vi. p. 453; Servius on Virg. Ãn., i. 28.

 [128] â_A wife and sister_.

âBut I, who walk in awful state above
The majesty of heavân, the sister-wife of Jove.â

Drydenâs âVirgil,â i. 70.

So Apuleius, _l. c._ speaks of her as âJovis germana et conjux, and so
Horace, Od. iii. 3, 64, âconjuge me Jovis et sorore.â

 [129]
âThither came Uriel, gleaming through the even
On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting star
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired
Impress the air, and shows the mariner
From what point of his compass to beware
Impetuous winds.â

ââParadise Lost,â iv. 555.

 [130] _Ãsepusâ flood_. A river of Mysia, rising from Mount Cotyius, in
 the southern part of the chain of Ida.

 [131] _Zelia_, a town of Troas, at the foot of Ida.

 [132] _Podaleirius_ and _MachÃ¤on_ are the leeches of the Grecian army,
 highly prized and consulted by all the wounded chiefs. Their medical
 renown was further prolonged in the subsequent poem of Arktinus, the
 Iliou Persis, wherein the one was represented as unrivalled in
 surgical operations, the other as sagacious in detecting and
 appreciating morbid symptoms. It was Podaleirius who first noticed the
 glaring eyes and disturbed deportment which preceded the suicide of
 Ajax.
    âGalen appears uncertain whether Asklepius (as well as Dionysus)
    was originally a god, or whether he was first a man and then became
    afterwards a god; but Apollodorus professed to fix the exact date
    of his apotheosis. Throughout all the historical ages the
    descendants of Asklepius were numerous and widely diffused. The
    many families or gentes, called Asklepiads, who devoted themselves
    to the study and practice of medicine, and who principally dwelt
    near the temples of Asklepius, whither sick and suffering men came
    to obtain reliefâall recognized the god not merely as the object of
    their common worship, but also as their actual progenitor.ââGrote
    vol. i. p. 248.

 [133]
âThe plant she bruises with a stone, and stands
Tempering the juice between her ivory hands
This oâer her breast she sheds with sovereign art
And bathes with gentle touch the wounded part
The wound such virtue from the juice derives,
At once the blood is stanchâd, the youth revives.â

âOrlando Furioso,â book 1.

 [134] _Well might I wish._

âWould heavân (said he) my strength and youth recall,
Such as I was beneath Praenesteâs wallâ
Then when I made the foremost foes retire,
And set whole heaps of conquerâd shields on fire;
When Herilus in single fight I slew,
Whom with three lives Feronia did endue.â

Drydenâs Virgil, viii. 742.

 [135] _Sthenelus_, a son of Capaneus, one of the Epigoni. He was one
 of the suitors of Helen, and is said to have been one of those who
 entered Troy inside the wooden horse.

 [136] _Forwarnâd the horrors_. The same portent has already been
 mentioned. To this day, modern nations are not wholly free from this
 superstition.

 [137] _Sevenfold city_, BÅotian Thebes, which had seven gates.

 [138] _As when the winds_.

âThus, when a black-browâd gust begins to rise,
White foam at first on the curlâd ocean fries;
Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies,
Till, by the fury of the storm full blown,
The muddy billow oâer the clouds is thrown.â

Drydenâs Virgil, vii. 736.

 [139]
âStood
Like Teneriffe or Atlas unremoved;
His stature reachâd the sky.â

ââParadise Lost,â iv. 986.

 [140] The Abantes seem to have been of Thracian origin.

 [141] I may, once for all, remark that Homer is most anatomically
 correct as to the parts of the body in which a wound would be
 immediately mortal.

 [142] _Ãnus_, a fountain almost proverbial for its coldness.

 [143] Compare Tasso, Gier. Lib., xx. 7:

âNuovo favor del cielo in lui niluce
E âl fa grande, et angusto oltre il costume.
Glâ empie dâ honor la faccia, e vi riduce
Di giovinezza il bel purpureo lume.â

 [144]
âOr deluges, descending on the plains,
Sweep oâer the yellow year, destroy the pains
Of labâring oxen, and the peasantâs gains;
Uproot the forest oaks, and bear away
Flocks, folds, and trees, an undistinguishâd prey.â

Drydenâs Virgil ii. 408.

 [145] _From mortal mists_.

âBut to nobler sights
Michael from Adamâs eyes the film removed.â

âParadise Lost,â xi. 411.

 [146] _The race of those_.

âA pair of coursers, born of heavânly breed,
Who from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire;
Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
By substituting mares produced on earth,
Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth.

Drydenâs Virgil, vii. 386, sqq.

 [147] The belief in the existence of men of larger stature in earlier
 times, is by no means confined to Homer.

 [148] _Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor_, or blood of the gods.

âA stream of nectârous humour issuing flowâd,
Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed.â

âParadise Lost,â vi. 339.

 [149] This was during the wars with the Titans.

 [150] _Amphitryonâs son_, Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife
 of Amphitryon.

 [151] _ÃgialÃ©_ daughter of Adrastus. The Cyclic poets (See Anthonâs
 Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in revenge
 for the wound she had received from her husband.

 [152] _PherÃ¦_, a town of Pelasgiotis, in Thessaly.

 [153] _Tlepolemus_, son of Hercules and Astyochia. Having left his
 native country, Argos, in consequence of the accidental murder of
 Liscymnius, he was commanded by an oracle to retire to Rhodes. Here he
 was chosen king, and accompanied the Trojan expedition. After his
 death, certain games were instituted at Rhodes in his honour, the
 victors being rewarded with crowns of poplar.

 [154] These heroesâ names have since passed into a kind of proverb,
 designating the _oi polloi_ or mob.

 [155] _Spontaneous open_.

âVeilâd with his gorgeous wings, upspringing light
Flew through the midst of heaven; thâ angelic quires,
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all thâ empyreal road; till at the gate
Of heaven arrived, the gate self-openâd wide,
On golden hinges turning.â

ââParadise Lost,â v. 250.

 [156]
âTill Morn,
Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand
Unbarrâd the gates of light.â

ââParadise Lost,â vi, 2.

 [157] _Far as a shepherd_. âWith what majesty and pomp does Homer
 exalt his deities! He here measures the leap of the horses by the
 extent of the world. And who is there, that, considering the exceeding
 greatness of the space would not with reason cry out that âIf the
 steeds of the deity were to take a second leap, the world would want
 room for itâ?ââLonginus, Section 8.

 [158] âNo trumpets, or any other instruments of sound, are used in the
 Homeric action itself; but the trumpet was known, and is introduced
 for the purpose of illustration as employed in war. Hence arose the
 value of a loud voice in a commander; Stentor was an indispensable
 officer... In the early Saracen campaigns frequent mention is made of
 the service rendered by men of uncommonly strong voices; the battle of
 Honain was restored by the shouts and menaces of Abbas, the uncle of
 Mohammed,â &c.âColeridge, p. 213.

 [159] âLong had the wavâring god the war delayâd,
While Greece and Troy alternate ownâd his aid.â

Merrickâs âTryphiodorus,â vi. 761, sq.

 [160] _PÃ¦on_ seems to have been to the gods, what Podaleirius and
 Machaon were to the Grecian heroes.

 [161] _Arisbe_, a colony of the Mitylenaeans in Troas.

 [162] _Pedasus_, a town near Pylos.

 [163] _Rich heaps of brass_. âThe halls of Alkinous and Menelaus
 glitter with gold, copper, and electrum; while large stocks of yet
 unemployed metalâgold, copper, and iron are stored up in the
 treasure-chamber of Odysseus and other chiefs. Coined money is unknown
 in the Homeric ageâthe trade carried on being one of barter. In
 reference also to the metals, it deserves to be remarked, that the
 Homeric descriptions universally suppose copper, and not iron, to be
 employed for arms, both offensive and defensive. By what process the
 copper was tempered and hardened, so as to serve the purpose of the
 warrior, we do not know; but the use of iron for these objects belongs
 to a later age.ââGrote, vol. ii. p. 142.

 [164] _Oh impotent_, &c. âIn battle, quarter seems never to have been
 given, except with a view to the ransom of the prisoner. Agamemnon
 reproaches Menelaus with unmanly softness, when he is on the point of
 sparing a fallen enemy, and himself puts the suppliant to the
 sword.ââThirlwall, vol. i. p. 181

 [165]
âThe ruthless steel, impatient of delay,
Forbade the sire to linger out the day.
It struck the bending father to the earth,
And cropt the wailing infant at the birth.
Can innocents the rage of parties know,
And they who neâer offended find a foe?â

Roweâs Lucan, bk. ii.

 [166]
âMeantime the Trojan dames, oppressâd with woe,
To Pallasâ fane in long procession go,
In hopes to reconcile their heavânly foe:
They weep; they beat their breasts; they rend their hair,
And rich embroiderâd vests for presents bear.â

Drydenâs Virgil, i. 670

 [167] The manner in which this episode is introduced, is well
 illustrated by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298: âThe
 poetâs method of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a
 curious manner his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where,
 for example, one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to
 be executed at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of
 this task is not, as a general rule, immediately described. A certain
 interval is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action,
 which interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary
 continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a
 while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further
 account of the mission is resumed.â

 [168] _With tablets sealed_. These probably were only devices of a
 hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric
 times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq.

 [169] _SolymÃ¦an crew_, a people of Lycia.

 [170] From this âmelancholy madnessâ of Bellerophon, hypochondria
 received the name of âMorbus Bellerophonteus.â See my notes in my
 prose translation, p. 112. The âAleian field,â _i.e._ âthe plain of
 wandering,â was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in
 Cilicia.

 [171] _His own, of gold_. This bad bargain has passed into a common
 proverb. See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23.

 [172] _ScÃ¦an, i e._ left hand.

 [173] _In fifty chambers_.

âThe fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,
So large a promise of a progeny,)
The ports of plated gold, and hung with spoils.â

Drydenâs Virgil, ii.658

 [174] _O would kind earth_, &c. âIt is apparently a sudden, irregular
 burst of popular indignation to which Hector alludes, when he regrets
 that the Trojans had not spirit enough to cover Paris with a mantle of
 stones. This, however, was also one of the ordinary formal modes of
 punishment for great public offences. It may have been originally
 connected with the same feelingâthe desire of avoiding the pollution
 of bloodshedâwhich seems to have suggested the practice of burying
 prisoners alive, with a scantling of food by their side. Though Homer
 makes no mention of this horrible usage, the example of the Roman
 Vestals affords reasons for believing that, in ascribing it to the
 heroic ages, Sophocles followed an authentic tradition.ââThirlwallâs
 Greece, vol. i. p. 171, sq.

 [175] _Parisâ lofty dome_. âWith respect to the private dwellings,
 which are oftenest described, the poetâs language barely enables us to
 form a general notion of their ordinary plan, and affords no
 conception of the style which prevailed in them or of their effect on
 the eye. It seems indeed probable, from the manner in which he dwells
 on their metallic ornaments that the higher beauty of proportion was
 but little required or understood, and it is, perhaps, strength and
 convenience, rather than elegance, that he means to commend, in
 speaking of the fair house which Paris had built for himself with the
 aid of the most skilful masons of Troy.ââThirlwallâs Greece, vol. i.
 p. 231.

 [176] _The wanton courser_.

âCome destrier, che da le regie stalle
    Ove a lâusa de lâarme si riserba,
Fugge, e libero al fiu per largo calle
    Va traglâ armenti, o al fiume usato, o a lâherba.â

Gier, Lib. ix. 75.

 [177] _Casque_. The original word is stephanae, about the meaning of
 which there is some little doubt. Some take it for a different kind of
 cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone, of the helmet.

 [178] _Athenian maid:_ Minerva.

 [179] _Celadon_, a river of Elis.

 [180] _OÃ¯leus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of OÃ¯leus, in contradistinction to
 Ajax, son of Telamon.

 [181] _In the generalâs helm_. It was customary to put the lots into a
 helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his
 choice.

 [182] _God of Thrace_. Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian
 epithet. Hence âMavortia MÅnia.â

 [183] _Grimly he smiled_.

âAnd death
Grinnâd horribly a ghastly smile.â

ââParadise Lost,â ii. 845.

âThere Mavors stands
Grinning with ghastly feature.â

âCareyâs Dante: Hell, v.

 [184]
âSete Ã² guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro,
Con pari honor di pari ambo possenti,
Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotte
Le ragioni, e âl riposo, e de la notte.â

âGier. Lib. vi. 51.

 [185] It was an ancient style of compliment to give a larger portion
 of food to the conqueror, or person to whom respect was to be shown.
 See Virg. Ãn. viii. 181. Thus Benjamin was honoured with a âdouble
 portion.â Gen. xliii. 34.

 [186] _Embattled walls._ âAnother essential basis of mechanical unity
 in the poem is the construction of the rampart. This takes place in
 the seventh book. The reason ascribed for the glaring improbability
 that the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet unfortified
 during nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely
 poetical one: âSo long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name
 sufficed to keep every foe at a distance.â The disasters consequent on
 his secession first led to the necessity of other means of protection.
 Accordingly, in the battles previous to the eighth book, no allusion
 occurs to a rampart; in all those which follow it forms a prominent
 feature. Here, then, in the anomaly as in the propriety of the Iliad,
 the destiny of Achilles, or rather this peculiar crisis of it, forms
 the pervading bond of connexion to the whole poem.ââMure, vol. i., p.
 257.

 [187] _What cause of fear_, &c.

âSeest thou not this? Or do we fear in vain
Thy boasted thunders, and thy thoughtless reign?â

Drydenâs Virgil, iv. 304.

 [188] _In exchange_. These lines are referred to by Theophilus, the
 Roman lawyer, iii. tit. xxiii. Â§ 1, as exhibiting the most ancient
 mention of barter.

 [189] âA similar bond of connexion, in the military details of the
 narrative, is the decree issued by Jupiter, at the commencement of the
 eighth book, against any further interference of the gods in the
 battles. In the opening of the twentieth book this interdict is
 withdrawn. During the twelve intermediate books it is kept steadily in
 view. No interposition takes place but on the part of the specially
 authorised agents of Jove, or on that of one or two contumacious
 deities, described as boldly setting his commands at defiance, but
 checked and reprimanded for their disobedience; while the other divine
 warriors, who in the previous and subsequent cantos are so active in
 support of their favourite heroes, repeatedly allude to the supreme
 edict as the cause of their present inactivity.ââMure, vol. i. p 257.
 See however, Muller, âGreek Literature,â ch. v. Section 6, and Grote,
 vol. ii. p. 252.

 [190] âAs far removed from God and light of heaven,
As from the centre thrice to thâ utmost pole.â

ââParadise Lost.â

âE quanto Ã¨ da le stelle al basso inferno,
Tanto Ã¨ piÃ¹ in sÃ¹ de la stellata speraâ

âGier. Lib. i. 7.

âSome of the epithets which Homer applies to the heavens seem to imply
that he considered it as a solid vault of metal. But it is not
necessary to construe these epithets so literally, nor to draw any such
inference from his description of Atlas, who holds the lofty pillars
which keep earth and heaven asunder. Yet it would seem, from the manner
in which the height of heaven is compared with the depth of Tartarus,
that the region of light was thought to have certain bounds. The summit
of the Thessalian Olympus was regarded as the highest point on the
earth, and it is not always carefully distinguished from the aerian
regions above The idea of a seat of the godsâperhaps derived from a
more ancient tradition, in which it was not attached to any
geographical siteâseems to be indistinctly blended in the poetâs mind
with that of the real mountain.ââThirlwallâs Greece, vol. i. p. 217,
sq.

 [191]
âNow lately heavân, earth, another world
Hung eâer my realm, linkâd in a golden chain
To that side heavân.â

ââParadise Lost,â ii. 1004.

 [192] _His golden scales_.

âJove now, sole arbiter of peace and war,
Held forth the fatal balance from afar:
Each host he weighs; by turns they both prevail,
Till Troy descending fixâd the doubtful scale.â

Merrickâs Tryphiodorus, v 687, sqq.

âOhâ Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
Hung forth in heavân his golden scales,
Wherein all things created first he weighed;
The pendulous round earth, with balanced air
In counterpoise; now ponders all events,
Battles and realms. In these he puts two weights,
The sequel each of parting and of fight:
The latter quick up flew, and kickâd the beam.â

âParadise Lost,â iv. 496.

 [193] _And now_, &c.

âAnd now all heaven
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread;
Had not thâ Almighty Father, where he sits
... foreseen.â

ââParadise Lost,â vi. 669.

 [194] _Gerenian Nestor_. The epithet _Gerenian_ either refers to the
 name of a place in which Nestor was educated, or merely signifies
 honoured, revered. See Schol. Venet. in II. B. 336; Strabo, viii. p.
 340.

 [195] _Ãgae, Helice_. Both these towns were conspicuous for their
 worship of Neptune.

 [196] _As full blown_, &c.

âIl suo Lesbia quasi bel fior succiso,
E in atto si gentil languir tremanti
Glâ occhi, e cader siu âl tergo il collo mira.â

Gier. Lib. ix. 85.

 [197] _Ungrateful_, because the cause in which they were engaged was
 unjust.

âStruck by the labâring priestsâ uplifted hands
The victims fall: to heavân they make their prayâr,
The curling vapours load the ambient air.
But vain their toil: the powârs who rule the skies
Averse beheld the ungrateful sacrifice.â

Merrickâs Tryphiodorus, vi. 527, sqq.

 [198]
âAs when about the silver moon, when aire is free from winde,
And stars shine cleare, to whose sweet beams high prospects on the
brows
Of all steepe hills and pinnacles thrust up themselves for shows,
And even the lowly valleys joy to glitter in their sight;
When the unmeasured firmament bursts to disclose her light,
And all the signs in heaven are seene, that glad the shepherdâs heart.â

Chapman.

 [199] This flight of the Greeks, according to Buttmann, Lexil. p. 358,
 was not a supernatural flight caused by the gods, but âa great and
 general one, caused by Hector and the Trojans, but with the approval
 of Jove.â

 [200] Grote, vol. ii. p. 91, after noticing the modest calmness and
 respect with which Nestor addresses Agamemnon, observes, âThe Homeric
 Council is a purely consultative body, assembled not with any power of
 peremptorily arresting mischievous resolves of the king, but solely
 for his information and guidance.â

 [201] In the heroic times, it is not unfrequent for the king to
 receive presents to purchase freedom from his wrath, or immunity from
 his exactions. Such gifts gradually became regular, and formed the
 income of the German, (Tacit. Germ. Section 15) Persian, (Herodot.
 iii.89), and other kings. So, too, in the middle ages, âThe feudal
 aids are the beginning of taxation, of which they for a long time
 answered the purpose.â (Hallam, Middle Ages, ch. x. pt. 1, p. 189)
 This fact frees Achilles from the apparent charge of sordidness.
 Plato, however, (De Rep. vi. 4), says, âWe cannot commend PhÅnix, the
 tutor of Achilles, as if he spoke correctly, when counselling him to
 accept of presents and assist the Greeks, but, without presents, not
 to desist from his wrath, nor again, should we commend Achilles
 himself, or approve of his being so covetous as to receive presents
 from Agamemnon,â &c.

 [202] It may be observed, that, brief as is the mention of BriseÃ¯s in
 the Iliad, and small the part she playsâwhat little is said is
 pre-eminently calculated to enhance her fitness to be the bride of
 Achilles. Purity, and retiring delicacy, are features well contrasted
 with the rough, but tender disposition of the hero.

 [203] _Laodice_. Iphianassa, or Iphigenia, is not mentioned by Homer,
 among the daughters of Agamemnon.

 [204] âAgamemnon, when he offers to transfer to Achilles seven towns
 inhabited by wealthy husbandmen, who would enrich their lord by
 presents and tribute, seems likewise to assume rather a property in
 them, than an authority over them. And the same thing may be intimated
 when it is said that Peleus bestowed a great people, the Dolopes of
 Phthia, on PhÅnix.ââThirlwallâs Greece, vol. i Section 6, p. 162,
 note.

 [205] _Pray in deep silence_. Rather: âuse well-omened words;â or, as
 Kennedy has explained it, âAbstain from expressions unsuitable to the
 solemnity of the occasion, which, by offending the god, might defeat
 the object of their supplications.â

 [206] _Purest hands_. This is one of the most ancient superstitions
 respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in tradition.

 [207] It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled
 siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in piratical
 expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of which
 Achilles now speaks. From the following verses, it is evident that
 fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the
 expedition, and not to the successful plunderer.

 [208] _Pythia_, the capital of Achillesâ Thessalian domains.

 [209] _Orchomenian town_. The topography of Orchomenus, in BÅotia,
 âsituated,â as it was, âon the northern bank of the lake Ãpais, which
 receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of Phocis, but
 also other rivers from Parnassus and Heliconâ (Grote, vol. p. 181),
 was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay. âAs long as the
 channels of these waters were diligently watched and kept clear, a
 large portion of the lake was in the condition of alluvial land,
 pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels came to be
 either neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy, the water
 accumulated in such a degree as to occupy the soil of more than one
 ancient islet, and to occasion the change of the site of Orchomenus
 itself from the plain to the declivity of Mount Hyphanteion.â (Ibid.)

 [210] The phrase âhundred gates,â &c., seems to be merely expressive
 of a great number. See notes to my prose translation, p. 162.

 [211] Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dyceâs
 Select Translations, p 88).â

âMany gifts he gave, and oâer
Dolopia bade me rule; thee in his arms
He brought an infant, on my bosom laid
The precious charge, and anxiously enjoinâd
That I should rear thee as my own with all
A parentâs love. I failâd not in my trust
And oft, while round my neck thy hands were lockâd,
From thy sweet lips the half articulate sound
Of Father came; and oft, as children use,
Mewling and puking didst thou drench my tunic.â

âThis description,â observes my learned friend (notes, p. 121) âis
taken from the passage of Homer, II ix, in translating which, Pope,
with that squeamish, artificial taste, which distinguished the age of
Anne, omits the natural (and, let me add, affecting) circumstance.â

âAnd the wine
Held to thy lips, and many a time in fits
Of infant frowardness the purple juice
Rejecting thou hast deluged all my vest,

And fillâd my bosom.â âCowper.

 [212] _Where Calydon_. For a good sketch of the story of Meleager, too
 long to be inserted here, see Grote, vol. i. p. 195, sqq.; and for the
 authorities, see my notes to the prose translation, p. 166.

 [213] â_Gifts can conquer_ââIt is well observed by Bishop Thirlwall,
 âGreece,â vol. i. p, 180, that the law of honour among the Greeks did
 not compel them to treasure up in their memory the offensive language
 which might be addressed to them by a passionate adversary, nor to
 conceive that it left a stain which could only be washed away by
 blood. Even for real and deep injuries they were commonly willing to
 accept a pecuniary compensation.â

 [214] âThe boon of sleep.ââMilton

 [215]
âAll else of natureâs common gift partake:
Unhappy Dido was alone awake.â

âDrydenâs Virgil, iv. 767.

 [216] _The king of Crete:_ Idomeneus.

 [217] _Soft wool within, i e._ a kind of woollen stuffing, pressed in
 between the straps, to protect the head, and make the helmet fit
 close.

 [218] âAll the circumstances of this actionâthe night, Rhesus buried
 in a profound sleep, and Diomede with the sword in his hand hanging
 over the head of that princeâfurnished Homer with the idea of this
 fiction, which represents Rhesus lying fast asleep, and, as it were,
 beholding his enemy in a dream, plunging the sword into his bosom.
 This image is very natural; for a man in his condition awakes no
 farther than to see confusedly what environs him, and to think it not
 a reality but a dream.ââPope.

âThereâs one did laugh in his sleep, and one cryâd murder;
They wakâd each other.â

â_Macbeth_.

 [219]
âAurora now had left her saffron bed,
And beams of early light the heavens oâerspread.â

Drydenâs Virgil, iv. 639

 [220] _Red drops of blood_. âThis phenomenon, if a mere fruit of the
 poetâs imagination, might seem arbitrary or far-fetched. It is one,
 however, of ascertained reality, and of no uncommon occurrence in the
 climate of Greece.ââMure, i p. 493. Cf. Tasso, Gier. Lib. ix. 15:

âLa terra in vece del notturno gelo
Bagnan rugiade tepide, e sanguigne.â

 [221]
âNo thought of flight,
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
That argued fear.â

ââParadise Lost,â vi. 236.

 [222] _One of love_. Although a bastard brother received only a small
 portion of the inheritance, he was commonly very well treated. Priam
 appears to be the only one of whom polygamy is directly asserted in
 the Iliad. Grote, vol. ii. p. 114, note.

 [223] âCircled with foes as when a packe of bloodie jackals cling
 About a goodly palmed hart, hurt with a hunterâs bow Whose escape his
 nimble feet insure, whilst his warm blood doth flow, And his light
 knees have power to move: but (maistred by his wound) Embost within a
 shady hill, the jackals charge him round, And teare his fleshâwhen
 instantly fortune sends in the powers Of some sterne lion, with whose
 sighte they flie and he devours. So they around Ulysses prest.â

âChapman.

 [224] _Simois, railing_, &c.

âIn those bloody fields
Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
Of heroes.â

âDrydenâs Virgil, i. 142.

 [225]
âWhere yon disorderâd heap of ruin lies,
Stones rent from stones,âwhere clouds of dust arise,â
Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place,
Below the wallâs foundation drives his mace,
And heaves the building from the solid base.â

Drydenâs Virgil, ii. 825.

 [226] _Why boast we_.

âWherefore do I assume
These royalties and not refuse to reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honour, due alike to him
Who reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the rest
High honourâd sits.â

ââParadise Lost,â ii. 450.

 [227] _Each equal weight_.

âLong time in even scale
The battle hung.â

ââParadise Lost,â vi. 245.

 [228]
âHe on his impious foes right onward drove,
_Gloomy as night_.â

ââParadise Lost,â vi. 831

 [229] _Renownâd for justice and for length of days_, Arrian. de Exp.
 Alex. iv. p. 239, also speaks of the independence of these people,
 which he regards as the result of their poverty and uprightness. Some
 authors have regarded the phrase âHippomolgian,â _i.e._ âmilking their
 mares,â as an epithet applicable to numerous tribes, since the oldest
 of the Samatian nomads made their maresâ milk one of their chief
 articles of diet. The epithet abion or abion, in this passage, has
 occasioned much discussion. It may mean, according as we read it,
 either âlong-lived,â or âbowless,â the latter epithet indicating that
 they did not depend upon archery for subsistence.

 [230] Compare Chapmanâs quaint, bold verses:â

âAnd as a round piece of a rocke, which with a winterâs flood
Is from his top torn, when a shoure poured from a bursten cloud,
Hath broke the naturall band it had within the roughftey rock,
Flies jumping all adourne the woods, resounding everie shocke,
And on, uncheckt, it headlong leaps till in a plaine it stay,
And then (thoâ never so impelled), it stirs not any way:â
So Hector,ââ

 [231] This book forms a most agreeable interruption to the continuous
 round of battles, which occupy the latter part of the Iliad. It is as
 well to observe, that the sameness of these scenes renders many notes
 unnecessary.

 [232] _Who to Tydeus owes, i.e._ Diomed.

 [233] Compare Tasso:â

Teneri sdegni, e placide, e tranquille
Repulse, e cari vezzi, e liete paci,
Sorrisi, parolette, e dolci stille
Di pianto, e sospir tronchi, e molli baci.â

Gier. Lib. xvi. 25

 [234] Compare the description of the dwelling of Sleep in Orlando
 Furioso, bk. vi.

 [235]
âTwice seven, the charming daughters of the mainâ
Around my person wait, and bear my train:
Succeed my wish, and second my design,
The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine.â

Drydenâs Virgil, Ãn. i. 107, seq.

 [236] _And Minos_. âBy Homer, Minos is described as the son of
 Jupiter, and of the daughter of PhÅnix, whom all succeeding authors
 name Europa; and he is thus carried back into the remotest period of
 Cretan antiquity known to the poet, apparently as a native hero,
 Illustrious enough for a divine parentage, and too ancient to allow
 his descent to be traced to any other source. But in a genealogy
 recorded by later writers, he is likewise the adopted son of Asterius,
 as descendant of Dorus, the son of Helen, and is thus connected with a
 colony said to have been led into Creta by Tentamus, or Tectamus, son
 of Dorus, who is related either to have crossed over from Thessaly, or
 to have embarked at Malea after having led his followers by land into
 Laconia.ââThirlwall, p. 136, seq.

 [237] Milton has emulated this passage, in describing the couch of our
 first parents:â

âUnderneath the violet,
Crocus, and hyacinth with rich inlay,
âBroiderâd the ground.â

ââParadise Lost,â iv. 700.

 [238] _He lies protected_.

âForthwith on all sides to his aid was run
By angels many and strong, who interposâd
Defence, while others bore him on their shields
Back to his chariot, where it stood retirâd
From off the files of war; there they him laid,
Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame.â

âParadise Lost,â vi. 335, seq.

 [239] _The brazen dome_. See the note on Bk. viii. Page 142.

 [240] _For, by the gods! who flies_. Observe the bold ellipsis of âhe
 cries,â and the transition from the direct to the oblique
 construction. So in Milton:â

âThus at their shady lodge arrivâd, both stood,
Both turnâd, and under open sky adorâd
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven,
Which they beheld, the moonâs resplendent globe,
And starry pole.âThou also madâst the night,
Maker omnipotent, and thou the day.â

Milton, âParadise Lost,â Book iv.

 [241] _So some tall rock_.

âBut like a rock unmovâd, a rock that braves
The raging tempest, and the rising wavesâ
Proppâd on himself he stands: his solid sides
Wash off the sea-weeds, and the sounding tides.â

Drydenâs Virgil, vii. 809.

 [242] Protesilaus was the first Greek who fell, slain by Hector, as he
 leaped from the vessel to the Trojan shore. He was buried on the
 Chersonese, near the city of Plagusa. Hygin Fab. ciii. Tzetz. on
 Lycophr. 245, 528. There is a most elegant tribute to his memory in
 the Preface to the Heroica of Philostratus.

 [243] _His best beloved_. The following elegant remarks of Thirlwall
 (Greece, vol. i, p. 176 seq.) well illustrate the character of the
 friendship subsisting between these two heroesâ
    âOne of the noblest and most amiable sides of the Greek character,
    is the readiness with which it lent itself to construct intimate
    and durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in
    the earliest than in later times. It was indeed connected with the
    comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but
    the devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were
    maintained, was not the less admirable and engaging. The heroic
    companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in
    traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the
    same feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a
    wish or object apart, and only to live as they are always ready to
    die for one another. It is true that the relation between them is
    not always one of perfect equality; but this is a circumstance
    which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the poetical
    description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it
    presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of
    Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may
    owe the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even
    dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the
    period to which the traditions are referred. The argument of the
    Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus,
    whose love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for
    his higher birth and his unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard
    which united Idomeneus and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus,
    though, as the persons themselves are less important, it is kept
    more in the back-ground, is manifestly viewed by the poet in the
    same light. The idea of a Greek hero seems not to have been thought
    complete, without such a brother in arms by his side.ââThirlwall,
    Greece, vol. i. p. 176, seq.

 [244]
âAs hungry wolves with raging appetite,
Scour through the fields, neâer fear the stormy nightâ
Their whelps at home expect the promised food,
And long to temper their dry chaps in bloodâ
So rushâd we forth at once.â

âDrydenâs Virgil, ii. 479.

 [245] _The destinies ordain_.ââIn the mythology, also, of the Iliad,
 purely Pagan as it is, we discover one important truth unconsciously
 involved, which was almost entirely lost from view amidst the nearly
 equal scepticism and credulity of subsequent ages. Zeus or Jupiter is
 popularly to be taken as omnipotent. No distinct empire is assigned to
 fate or fortune; the will of the father of gods and men is absolute
 and uncontrollable. This seems to be the true character of the Homeric
 deity, and it is very necessary that the student of Greek literature
 should bear it constantly in mind. A strong instance in the Iliad
 itself to illustrate this position, is the passage where Jupiter
 laments to Juno the approaching death of Sarpedon. âAlas me!â says he
 âsince it is fated (moira) that Sarpedon, dearest to me of men, should
 be slain by Patroclus, the son of Menoetius! Indeed, my heart is
 divided within me while I ruminate it in my mind, whether having
 snatched him up from out of the lamentable battle, I should not at
 once place him alive in the fertile land of his own Lycia, or whether
 I should now destroy him by the hands of the son of Menoetius!â To
 which Juno answersââDost thou mean to rescue from death a mortal man,
 long since destined by fate (palai pepromenon)? You may do itâbut we,
 the rest of the gods, do not sanction it.â Here it is clear from both
 speakers, that although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter
 might still, if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of
 the reach of any such event, and further, in the alternative, that
 Jupiter himself would destroy him by the hands of another.ââColeridge,
 p. 156. seq.

 [246] _Thrice at the battlements_. âThe art military of the Homeric
 age is upon a level with the state of navigation just described,
 personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the
 ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale. The
 chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights of
 romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a
 captain in the guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a ditch
 or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself was
 accessible without a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of earth
 with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in armour. The
 Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive assistance from
 their allies to the very end.ââColeridge, p. 212.

 [247] _Ciconians_.âA people of Thrace, near the Hebrus.

 [248] _They wept_.

âFast by the manger stands the inactive steed,
And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;
He stands, and careless of his golden grain,
Weeps his associates and his master slain.â

Merrickâs Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.

âNothing is heard upon the mountains now,
But pensive herds that for their master low,
Straggling and comfortless about they rove,
Unmindful of their pasture and their love.â

Moschus, id. 3, parodied, _ibid._

âTo close the pomp, Ãthon, the steed of state,
Is led, the funeral of his lord to wait.
Strippâd of his trappings, with a sullen pace
He walks, and the big tears run rolling down his face.â

Drydenâs Virgil, bk. ii

 [249] _Some brawny bull_.

âLike to a bull, that with impetuous spring
Darts, at the moment when the fatal blow
Hath struck him, but unable to proceed
Plunges on either side.â

âCareyâs Dante: Hell, c. xii.

 [250] This is connected with the earlier part of last book, the
 regular narrative being interrupted by the message of Antilochus and
 the lamentations of Achilles.

 [251] _Far in the deep_. So Oceanus hears the lamentations of
 Prometheus, in the play of Ãschylus, and comes from the depths of the
 sea to comfort him.

 [252] Opuntia, a city of Locris.

 [253] Quintus Calaber, lib. v., has attempted to rival Homer in his
 description of the shield of the same hero. A few extracts from Mr.
 Dyceâs version (Select Translations, p. 104, seq.) may here be
 introduced.

âIn the wide circle of the shield were seen
Refulgent images of various forms,
The work of Vulcan; who had there described
The heaven, the ether, and the earth and sea,
The winds, the clouds, the moon, the sun, apart
In different stations; and you there might view
The stars that gem the still-revolving heaven,
And, under them, the vast expanse of air,
In which, with outstretchâd wings, the long-beakâd bird
Winnowâd the gale, as if instinct with life.
Around the shield the waves of ocean flowâd,
The realms of Tethys, which unnumberâd streams,
In azure mazes rolling oâer the earth,
Seemâd to augment.â

 [254] _On seats of stone_. âSeveral of the old northern Sagas
 represent the old men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting
 on great stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsringââ
 Grote, ii. p. 100, note. On the independence of the judicial office in
 The heroic times, see Thirlwallâs Greece, vol. i. p. 166.

 [255] _Another part_, &c.

âAnd here
Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale
Were heroes lying with their slaughterâd steeds
Upon the ground incarnadinâd with blood.
Stern stalked Bellona, smearâd with reeking gore,
Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen,
And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife
Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames:
Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape
Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng,
Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat;
And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes.
That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
Such were the horrors of dire war.â

âDyceâs Calaber.

 [256] _A field deep furrowed_.

âHere was a corn field; reapers in a row,
Each with a sharp-toothâd sickle in his hand,
Workâd busily, and, as the harvest fell,
Others were ready still to bind the sheaves:
Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away
The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here
The plough were drawing, and the furrowâd glebe
Was black behind them, while with goading wand
The active youths impellâd them. Here a feast
Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre
A band of blooming virgins led the dance.
As if endued with life.â
âDyceâs Calaber.

 [257] Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently
 compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by
 Hesiod. He remarks that, âwith two or three exceptions, the imagery
 differs in little more than the names and arrangements; and the
 difference of arrangement in the Shield of Hercules is altogether for
 the worse. The natural consecution of the Homeric images needs no
 exposition: it constitutes in itself one of the beauties of the work.
 The Hesiodic images are huddled together without connection or
 congruity: Mars and Pallas are awkwardly introduced among the Centaurs
 and Lapithae;â but the gap is wide indeed between them and Apollo with
 the Muses, waking the echoes of Olympus to celestial harmonies; whence
 however, we are hurried back to Perseus, the Gorgons, and other images
 of war, over an arm of the sea, in which the sporting dolphins, the
 fugitive fishes, and the fisherman on the shore with his casting net,
 are minutely represented. As to the Hesiodic images themselves, the
 leading remark is, that they catch at beauty by ornament, and at
 sublimity by exaggeration; and upon the untenable supposition of the
 genuineness of this poem, there is this curious peculiarity, that, in
 the description of scenes of rustic peace, the superiority of Homer is
 decisiveâwhile in those of war and tumult it may be thought, perhaps,
 that the Hesiodic poet has more than once the advantage.â

 [258] âThis legend is one of the most pregnant and characteristic in
 the Grecian Mythology; it explains, according to the religious ideas
 familiar to the old epic poets, both the distinguishing attributes and
 the endless toil and endurances of Heracles, the most renowned
 subjugator of all the semi-divine personages worshipped by the
 Hellenes,âa being of irresistible force, and especially beloved by
 Zeus, yet condemned constantly to labour for others and to obey the
 commands of a worthless and cowardly persecutor. His recompense is
 reserved to the close of his career, when his afflicting trials are
 brought to a close: he is then admitted to the godhead, and receives
 in marriage Hebe.ââGrote, vol. i. p. 128.

 [259] _Ambrosia_.

âThe blue-eyed maid,
In evâry breast new vigour to infuse.
Brings nectar temperâd with ambrosial dews.â

Merrickâs Tryphiodorus, vi. 249.

 [260] âHell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He
 stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth
 upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the
 cloud is not rent under them.â Job xxvi. 6-8.

 [261]
âSwift from his throne the infernal monarch ran,
All pale and trembling, lest the race of man,v Slain by Joveâs wrath,
and led by Hermesâ rod,
Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode.â

Merrickâs Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq.

 [262] These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might
 be delayed, but never wholly set aside.

 [263] It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal,
 to behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22.

 [264]
âEre Ilium and the Trojan towârs arose,
In humble vales they built their soft abodes.â

Drydenâs Virgil, iii. 150.

 [265] _Along the level seas_. Compare Virgilâs description of Camilla,
 who

âOutstrippâd the winds in speed upon the plain,
Flew oâer the field, nor hurt the bearded grain:
She swept the seas, and, as she skimmâd along,
Her flying feet unbathed on billows hung.â

Dryden, vii. 1100.

 [266] _The future father_. âÃneas and Antenor stand distinguished from
 the other Trojans by a dissatisfaction with Priam, and a sympathy with
 the Greeks, which is by Sophocles and others construed as treacherous
 collusion,âa suspicion indirectly glanced at, though emphatically
 repelled, in the Ãneas of Virgil.ââGrote, i. p. 427.

 [267] Neptune thus recounts his services to Ãneas:

âWhen your Ãneas fought, but fought with odds
Of force unequal, and unequal gods:
I spread a cloud before the victorâs sight,
Sustainâd the vanquishâd, and secured his flightâ
Even then secured him, when I sought with joy
The vowâd destruction of ungrateful Troy.â

Drydenâs Virgil, v. 1058.

 [268] _On Polydore_. Euripides, Virgil, and others, relate that
 Polydore was sent into Thrace, to the house of Polymestor, for
 protection, being the youngest of Priamâs sons, and that he was
 treacherously murdered by his host for the sake of the treasure sent
 with him.

 [269] âPerhaps the boldest excursion of Homer into this region of
 poetical fancy is the collision into which, in the twenty-first of the
 Iliad, he has brought the river god Scamander, first with Achilles,
 and afterwards with Vulcan, when summoned by Juno to the heroâs aid.
 The overwhelming fury of the stream finds the natural interpretation
 in the character of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor.
 Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to be
 easily forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the
 mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may
 suddenly immerse him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of
 Achilles by the fiery arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same ready
 explanation from physical causes. Yet the subsiding of the flood at
 the critical moment when the heroâs destruction appeared imminent,
 might, by a slight extension of the figurative parallel, be ascribed
 to a god symbolic of the influences opposed to all atmospheric
 moisture.ââMure, vol. i. p. 480, sq.

 [270] Wood has observed, that âthe circumstance of a falling tree,
 which is described as reaching from one of its banks to the other,
 affords a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander.â

 [271] _Ignominious_. Drowning, as compared with a death in the field
 of battle, was considered utterly disgraceful.

 [272] _Beneath a caldron_.

âSo, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
The bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
Above the brims they force their fiery way;
Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day.â

Drydenâs Virgil, vii. 644.

 [273] âThis tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by
 order of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not
 unfrequently among the incidents of the Mythical world.ââGrote, vol.
 i. p. 156.

 [274] _Not half so dreadful_.

âOn the other side,
Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
Unterrified, and like a comet burnâd,
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes pestilence and war.â

ââParadise Lost,â xi. 708.

 [275] âAnd thus his own undaunted mind explores.âââParadise Lost,â vi.
 113.

 [276] The example of Nausicaa, in the Odyssey, proves that the duties
 of the laundry were not thought derogatory, even from the dignity of a
 princess, in the heroic times.

 [277] _Hesper shines with keener light_.

âFairest of stars, last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn.â

âParadise Lost,â v. 166.

 [278] Such was his fate. After chasing the Trojans into the town, he
 was slain by an arrow from the quiver of Paris, directed under the
 unerring auspices of Apollo. The greatest efforts were made by the
 Trojans to possess themselves of the body, which was however rescued
 and borne off to the Grecian camp by the valour of Ajax and Ulysses.
 Thetis stole away the body, just as the Greeks were about to burn it
 with funeral honours, and conveyed it away to a renewed life of
 immortality in the isle of Leuke in the Euxine.

 [279] _Astyanax_, i.e. the _city-king_ or guardian. It is amusing that
 Plato, who often finds fault with Homer without reason, should have
 copied this twaddling etymology into his Cratylus.

 [280] This book has been closely imitated by Virgil in his fifth book,
 but it is almost useless to attempt a selection of passages for
 comparison.

 [281] _Thrice in order led_. This was a frequent rite at funerals. The
 Romans had the same custom, which they called _decursio_. Plutarch
 states that Alexander, in after times, renewed these same honours to
 the memory of Achilles himself.

 [282] _And swore_. Literally, and called Orcus, the god of oaths, to
 witness. See Buttmann, Lexilog, p. 436.

 [283]
âO, long expected by thy friends! from whence
Art thou so late returnâd for our defence?
Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
With length of labours, and with, toils of war?
After so many funerals of thy own,
Art thou restored to thy declining town?
But say, what wounds are these? what new disgrace
Deforms the manly features of thy face?â

Dryden, xi. 369.

 [284] _Like a thin smoke_. Virgil, Georg. iv. 72.

âIn vain I reach my feeble hands to join
In sweet embracesâah! no longer thine!
She said, and from his eyes the fleeting fair
Retired, like subtle smoke dissolved in air.â

Dryden.

 [285] So Milton:â

âSo eagerly the fiend
Oâer bog, oâer steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies.â

âParadise Lost,â ii. 948.

 [286]
âAn ancient forest, for the work designâd
(The shady covert of the savage kind).
The Trojans found: the sounding axe is placed:
Firs, pines, and pitch-trees, and the towâring pride
Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
High trunks of trees, fellâd from the steepy crown
Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down.â

Drydenâs Virgil, vi. 261.

 [287] _He vowed_. This was a very ancient custom.

 [288] The height of the tomb or pile was a great proof of the dignity
 of the deceased, and the honour in which he was held.

 [289] On the prevalence of this cruel custom amongst the northern
 nations, see Mallet, p. 213.

 [290] _And calls the spirit_. Such was the custom anciently, even at
 the Roman funerals.

âHail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
Paternal ashes, now revived in vain.â

Drydenâs Virgil, v. 106.

 [291] Virgil, by making the boaster vanquished, has drawn a better
 moral from this episode than Homer. The following lines deserve
 comparison:â

âThe haughty Dares in the lists appears:
Walking he strides, his head erected bears:
His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
And loud applauses echo through the field.
* * * *
Such Dares was, and such he strode along,
And drew the wonder of the gazing throng
His brawny breast and ample chest he shows;
His lifted arms around his head he throws,
And deals in whistling air his empty blows.
His match is sought, but, through the trembling band,
No one dares answer to the proud demand.
Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes,
Already he devours the promised prize.
* * * *
If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?â

Drydenâs Virgil, v. 486, seq.

 [292]
âThe gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore
His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
His mouth and nostrils pourâd a purple flood,
And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood.â

Drydenâs Virgil, v. 623.

 [293] âTroilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also
 in the Cypriad but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an
 object of great interest with the subsequent poets.ââGrote, i, p. 399.

 [294] Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of
 Gabriel, âParadise Lost,â bk. v. 266, seq.

âDown thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air. * * * *
* * * *
At once on thâ eastern cliff of Paradise
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A seraph wingâd. * * * *
Like Maiaâs son he stood,
And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance fillâd
The circuit wide.â

Virgil, Ãn. iv. 350:â

âHermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
And whether oâer the seas or earth he flies,
With rapid force they bear him down the skies
But first he grasps within his awful hand
The mark of sovereign power, his magic wand;
With this he draws the ghost from hollow graves;
With this he drives them from the Stygian waves:
* * * *
Thus armâd, the god begins his airy race,v And drives the racking
clouds along the liquid space.â

Dryden.

 [295] In reference to the whole scene that follows, the remarks of
 Coleridge are well worth reading:â
    âBy a close study of life, and by a true and natural mode of
    expressing everything, Homer was enabled to venture upon the most
    peculiar and difficult situations, and to extricate himself from
    them with the completest success. The whole scene between Achilles
    and Priam, when the latter comes to the Greek camp for the purpose
    of redeeming the body of Hector, is at once the most profoundly
    skilful, and yet the simplest and most affecting passage in the
    Iliad. Quinctilian has taken notice of the following speech of
    Priam, the rhetorical artifice of which is so transcendent, that if
    genius did not often, especially in oratory, unconsciously fulfil
    the most subtle precepts of criticism, we might be induced, on this
    account alone, to consider the last book of the Iliad as what is
    called spurious, in other words, of later date than the rest of the
    poem. Observe the exquisite taste of Priam in occupying the mind of
    Achilles, from the outset, with the image of his father; in
    gradually introducing the parallel of his own situation; and,
    lastly, mentioning Hectorâs name when he perceives that the hero is
    softened, and then only in such a manner as to flatter the pride of
    the conqueror. The ego dâeleeinoteros per, and the apusato aecha
    geronta, are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the
    Iliad. They are almost too fine and pathetic. The whole passage
    defies translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no
    name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can
    only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to
    transfuse it into another language.ââColeridge, p. 195.

 [296] âAchillesâ ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot
 but offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity. The heroic
 age, however, must be judged by its own moral laws. Retributive
 vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated by
 the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that evil
 inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured man; but
 made the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the fate of the
 body from which it had separated. Hence a denial of the rites
 essential to the soulâs admission into the more favoured regions of
 the lower world was a cruel punishment to the wanderer on the dreary
 shores of the infernal river. The complaint of the ghost of Patroclus
 to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own obsequies, shows
 how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his destroyer must
 have been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which, even after death,
 was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades. Hence before yielding
 up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks pardon of Patroclus for
 even this partial cession of his just rights of retribution.ââMure,
 vol. i. 289.

 [297] Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.

âHere, from the towâr by stern Ulysses thrown,
Andromache bewailâd her infant son.â

Merrickâs Tryphiodorus, v. 675.

 [298] The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant
 and interesting view of Helenâs characterâ
    âFew things are more interesting than to observe how the same hand
    that has given us the fury and inconsistency of Achilles, gives us
    also the consummate elegance and tenderness of Helen. She is
    through the Iliad a genuine lady, graceful in motion and speech,
    noble in her associations, full of remorse for a fault for which
    higher powers seem responsible, yet grateful and affectionate
    towards those with whom that fault had committed her. I have always
    thought the following speech in which Helen laments Hector, and
    hints at her own invidious and unprotected situation in Troy, as
    almost the sweetest passage in the poem. It is another striking
    instance of that refinement of feeling and softness of tone which
    so generally distinguish the last book of the Iliad from the
    rest.ââClassic Poets, p. 198, seq.

 [299] âAnd here we part with Achilles at the moment best calculated to
 exalt and purify our impression of his character. We had accompanied
 him through the effervescence, undulations, and final subsidence of
 his stormy passions. We now leave him in repose and under the full
 influence of the more amiable affections, while our admiration of his
 great qualities is chastened by the reflection that, within a few
 short days the mighty being in whom they were united was himself to be
 suddenly cut off in the full vigour of their exercise.
    The frequent and touching allusions, interspersed throughout the
    Iliad, to the speedy termination of its heroâs course, and the
    moral on the vanity of human life which they indicate, are among
    the finest evidences of the spirit of ethic unity by which the
    whole framework of the poem is united.ââMure, vol. i. p 201.

 [300] Cowper says,ââI cannot take my leave of this noble poem without
 expressing how much I am struck with the plain conclusion of it. It is
 like the exit of a great man out of company, whom he has entertained
 magnificently; neither pompous nor familiar; not contemptuous, yet
 without much ceremony.â Coleridge, p. 227, considers the termination
 of âParadise Lostâ somewhat similar.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


